### ELECTRONIC WASTE AND THE ENVIRONMENT1

The electrical and electronic waste (e-waste) is one of the fastest growing waste streams in different parts of the world. The electrical and electronics equipment growth rate in India has undergone a sea of change since the last quarter of the twentieth century. During the 1980s, the government policy has encouraged the white goods that have led to the growth of consumer appliances like washing machines, refrigerators, televisions, etc. Since the early 1990s, the government gave priority for the information and communication technologies and that has led to the growth of computers, mobile phones, etc. In addition to this, technological advancement in the electrical and electronic equipment has led to the disposal of the old one. For instance, in the late 1980s, we have used big floppy, in the 1990s, we have used small floppy, in the early twenty-first century, we are using CDs and for the last few years, we are using pen drive. In other words, within twenty-five years, we have changed three to four types of models quickly to store information. This kind of technological advancement/ innovation is taking place in the field of electrical and electronic products. On the one hand, the lifespan of the electrical and electronic products is short and added to that, on the other hand, spurt of technological innovation is leading to the disposal of the old, outdated products. While encouraging the electrical and electronic products, no serious measures have been initiated to control the generation of e-waste by the government. Whatever little measures were initiated by the government have not made any serious impact either to control or manage e-waste. Further, e-waste has become a global concern because many components of the above equipment are toxic and nonbiodegradable in nature. It has resulted in posing a grave threat to natural resources and public health in the existing circumstances. Given the scenario, this chapter attempts to analyse the nature and trends of e-waste in India and its impact on the environment and ecology during the last three and half decades (1980–2015). Further, it also attempts to capture the e-waste management initiatives and their impact over the years. It argues that whatever the little measures that have been initiated to control e-waste have not made any notable impact on reducing the threat being caused to the natural resources

and public health. Precisely, therefore, this chapter attempts to analyse the trend of e-waste and its impact on the environment and ecology, and the measures taken to control e-waste and its impact over the last three and a half decades in India (1980–2015).

This chapter is divided into nine sections. The second section gives the meaning, definition and its components of e-waste. The third section analyses the growth and development of electrical and electronic goods in India. The fourth section focuses on the longevity of e-waste goods. The fifth section studies the trends of e-waste in India. The sixth section focuses on the ecological and environmental consequences. The seventh section recounts the e-waste controlling measures. The eight section discusses about the features of e-waste rules and the last section ends with concluding observations.

#### *E-WASTE MEANING, DEFINITION AND ITS COMPONENTS*

The term 'electronics' encompasses a wide range of home and business electronic goods, including televisions, monitors, computers, computer peripherals, audio and stereo equipment, VCRs, DVD players, video cameras, telephones, fax and copy machines, cellular phones, wireless devices, etc. Household appliances, such as washers, dryers, refrigerators and toasters, can also be considered as electronics. Electronic waste, 'e-waste' or 'Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment' (WEEE) is the waste material consisting of any broken or unwanted electrical or electronic appliances. At the global level, the term e-waste or WEEE means electronic waste. There is no specific definition applicable at the global level. However, different countries have defined the term e-waste/WEEE. Precisely, e-waste is consumer electronic equipment that are no longer wanted by the users. It is to be pointed out that the European Union Directive and Basel Convention have developed a comprehensive definition for the e-waste at the beginning. However, the European Union Directive definition is widely accepted by the most of the western countries.<sup>2</sup>

As per EU Directive, e-waste is defined as: 'Electrical or electronic equipment which is waste including all components, subassemblies and consumables, which are part of the product at the time of discarding'. The 'electrical and electronic equipment' or 'EEE' is broadly classified into ten categories: (a) large household appliances; (b) small household appliances; (c) IT and telecommunications equipment; (d) consumer equipment; (e) lighting equipment; (f) electrical and electronic tools (with the exception of large-scale stationary industrial tools); (g) toys,

leisure and sports equipment; (h) medical devices (with the exception of all implanted and infected products); (i) Monitoring and control instruments and (j) automatic dispensers.<sup>3</sup>

Large household appliances include large cooling appliances; refrigerators; freezers; other large appliances used for refrigeration; conservation and storage of food; washing machines; clothes dryers; dish washing machines; cooking ovens and stoves; electric hot plates; microwaves; and other large appliances used for cooking and other processing of food; electric heating appliances; electric radiators; and other fanning; exhaust ventilation and air conditioning equipment. Small household appliances include: vacuum cleaners, carpet sweepers, other appliances for cleaning, appliances used for sewing, knitting, weaving and other processing for textiles, iron and other appliances for ironing; mangling and other care of clothing; toasters, fryers, grinders, coffee machines and equipment for opening or sealing containers or packages; electric knives, appliances for hair-cutting, hair drying, tooth brushing, shaving, massage and other body care appliances; and clocks, watches and equipment for the purpose of measuring indicating or registering time scales.

The IT and telecommunications equipment include centralised data processing, mainframes, minicomputers, printer units, personal computing like personal computers (CPU, mouse, screen and keyboard included), laptop computer (CPU, mouse, screen and keyboard included), notebook computers, notepad computers, printers, copying equipment; electrical and electronic typewriters, pocket and desk calculators; and other products and equipment for the collection, storage, processing, presentation or communication of information by electronic means; user terminals and systems, facsimile, telex, telephones, pay telephones, cordless telephones, cellular telephones, answering systems; and other products or equipment transmitting sound, images or other information by telecommunications. The consumer equipment consists of radio sets, television sets, video cameras, video recorders, hi-fi recorders, audio amplifiers, musical instruments, other products or equipment for the purpose of recording or reproducing sound or image, including signals or other technologies for the distribution of sound and image other than by telecommunications.

Lighting equipment comprises luminaries for fluorescent lamps with the exception of luminaries in households; straight fluorescent lamps; compact fluorescent lamps; high intensity discharge lamps, including pressure sodium lamps and metal lamps; low pressure sodium lamps; and other lighting or equipment for the purpose of spreading or controlling light with the exception of filament bulbs. The electrical and electronic tools (with the exception of large-scale stationary industrial tools) include drills, saws, sewing machines, equipment for turning, milling, sanding, grinding, sawing, cutting, shearing, drilling, making, holes, punching, folding, bending or similar processing of wood, metal and other materials; tools for riveting, nailing or screwing or removing rivets, nails, screws or similar uses; tools for welding, soldering or similar use; equipment for spraying, spreading, dispersing or other treatment of liquid or gaseous substances by other means; and tools for mowing or other gardening activities.

Toys, leisure and sports equipment, such as electric trains or car racing sets, hand-held video game consoles, video games; computers for biking, diving, running, rowing, etc.; sports equipment with electric or electronic components; and coin slot machines. The medical devices (with the exception of all implanted and infected products) include radiotherapy equipment; cardiology, dialysis, pulmonary ventilators; nuclear medicine; laboratory equipment for in-vitro diagnosis, analysers, freezers, fertilisation tests; and other appliances for detecting, preventing, monitoring, treating, alleviating illness, injury or disability. The monitoring and control instruments include smoke detector, heating regulators, thermostats; measuring, weighing or adjusting appliances for household or as laboratory equipment; and other monitoring and control instruments used in industrial installations (for example, in control panels). The Automatic dispensers include automatic dispensers for hot drinks; automatic dispensers for hot or cold bottles or cans; automatic dispensers for solid products; automatic dispensers for money; and all appliances which deliver automatically all kind of products.<sup>4</sup>

India has come out with its own definition. According to the Ministry of Environment and Forests Guidelines (2008):

E-waste comprises of wastes generated from used electronic devices and household appliances which are not fit for their original intended use and are destined for recovery, recycling or disposal. Such waste encompasses wide range of electrical and electronic devices such as computers, hand held cellular phones, personal stereos, including large household appliances such as refrigerators, air conditioners etc.5

E-waste sources can be broadly classified into two categories, i.e., domestic (dismantling/retrofitting of obsolete e-products and manufacturing process) and imported (scrap dismantling/reprocessing and donations.<sup>6</sup> The composition of WEEE/e-waste is very diverse and differs in products across different categories. It contains more than

1,000 different substances, which fall under 'hazardous' and 'nonhazardous' categories. According to UN Environment Programme (UNEP):

[I]t consists of ferrous and non-ferrous metals, plastics, glass, wood and plywood, printed circuit boards, concrete and ceramics, rubber and other items. Iron and steel constitute about 50% of the WEEE followed by plastics (21%), non-ferrous metals (13%) and other constituents. Non-ferrous metals consist of metals like copper, aluminum and precious metals like silver, gold, platinum, palladium, etc. The presence of elements like lead, mercury, arsenic, cadmium, selenium, and hexavalent chromium and flame retardants beyond threshold quantities in WEEE/E-waste classifies them as hazardous waste.7

Precisely, different types of discarded electronics by the user known as end-of-life electronics products, electronics waste, e-waste or WEEE.

# *GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONIC GOODS IN INDIA*

Since Independence, the generation of electricity has undergone a phenomenal growth that has led to the growth of electrical and electronic products, particularly since the last quarter of the twentieth century. In the 1980s, the government has encouraged the white goods that have led to the growth of consumer appliances—washing machines, refrigerators, televisions sets, etc. In the 1990s, development in the information and communication technologies has led to the growth of computers, mobile phones, etc. Let us see the nature and trend of the electrical and electronic goods/products in India.

## **Computer and Related Products**

The number of computers (desktops, laptops), printers (dot matrix, inkjet, laser), uninterrupted power supply, other peripherals (keyboards, monitors) and networking products (hubs, modem, Network Interface Controller or NIC<sup>8</sup> and their sales are progressively increasing over the period (Table 7.1). For instance, in 2000–2001, 18.82 lakh personal computers (desktops and notebooks) were sold and it has increased to 80.35 lakhs in 2009–2010. Likewise, the servers, different types of printers, UPS, other peripherals and networking products have also increased manifold during the last decade, i.e., 2000–2010 (Table 7.1).

| 373,553<br>113,894<br>159,178<br>144,117<br>245,141<br>Hubs<br>Monitors<br>5,490,425<br>2,786,000<br>3,642,000<br>4,637,000<br>5,589,959<br>,888,000<br>1,704,000<br>2,387,000<br>Keyboards<br>5,333,717<br>,914,000<br>,704,000<br>2,380,000<br>2,749,000<br>3,669,000<br>4,639,000<br>5,579,000<br>1,208,413<br>1,620,738<br>1,518,433<br>2,172,290<br>375,458<br>398,195<br>954,260<br>645,654<br>465,501<br>442,286<br>142,000<br>472,022<br>100,000<br>325,000<br>443,200<br>71,000<br>60,000<br>93,000<br>Laser<br>Inkjet<br>591,000<br>636,000<br>783,607<br>751,683<br>428,000<br>486,000<br>717,000<br>608,991<br>43,000<br>Dot Matrix<br>441,316<br>325,000<br>346,000<br>316,000<br>346,000<br>399,000<br>472,000<br>374,700<br>393,951<br>122,178<br>119,591<br>49,165<br>90,189<br>64,090<br>50,880<br>56,544<br>53,330<br>89,161<br>2,293,643<br>5,046,558<br>7,344,306<br>6,796,107<br>1,881,640<br>1,670,880<br>3,809,724<br>3,035,591<br>6,341,451<br>$2001 - 2002$<br>2008-2009<br>2002-2003<br>2004-2005<br>2005-2006<br>2007-2008<br>2006-2007<br>2003-2004<br>2000-2001 |           |           |         | Printers |         |         | UPS       | Other Peripherals |           | Networking Products |         |             |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------|-----------|---------|----------|---------|---------|-----------|-------------------|-----------|---------------------|---------|-------------|
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | Year      | PCs       | Server  |          |         |         |           |                   |           |                     | Modems  | <b>NICs</b> |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |           |           |         |          |         |         |           |                   |           |                     |         |             |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |           |           |         |          |         |         |           |                   |           |                     |         |             |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |           |           |         |          |         |         |           |                   |           |                     |         |             |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |           |           |         |          |         |         |           |                   |           |                     | 661,022 | 1,983,069   |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |           |           |         |          |         |         |           |                   |           |                     | 772,550 | 1,801,854   |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |           |           |         |          |         |         |           |                   |           |                     | 594,028 | 3,646,145   |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |           |           |         |          |         |         |           |                   |           |                     |         |             |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |           |           |         |          |         |         |           |                   |           |                     | 266,370 | 3,795,271   |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |           |           |         |          |         |         |           |                   |           |                     | 202,358 | 3,912,191   |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | 2009-2010 | 8,034,556 | 101,827 | 383,597  | 812,310 | 525,882 | 2,324,480 | 5,756,923         | 5,754,091 | 161,602             | 238,744 | 3,454,721   |

| i                                     |
|---------------------------------------|
| I                                     |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
| 1                                     |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
| 1                                     |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
| I                                     |
| $\ddot{a}$                            |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
| $\frac{1}{2}$                         |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
| j<br>i                                |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
| í                                     |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
| ı                                     |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
| I                                     |
| ļ                                     |
| I                                     |
| ١                                     |
| $\begin{array}{c} \hline \end{array}$ |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
|                                       |
| $\mathbf{F}$                          |
| i                                     |
|                                       |
| ì<br>j                                |
|                                       |
| Tabl.<br>$\frac{1}{2}$<br>i           |

Sources: MAIT, IT Industry Performance Annual Review: 2009–2010; MAIT, IT Industry Performance Annual Review: 2005–2006.9 *Sources*: MAIT, *IT Industry Performance Annual Review: 2009–2010;* MAIT, *IT Industry Performance Annual Review*: 2005–2006.9

# **Telephone**

The number of telephones has increased tremendously during the last two to three decades. At the time of Independence, the total number of telephones in this country was about 8 lakhs and it has increased to 10 lakhs in 1951, 33 lakhs in 1961 and 98 lakhs in 1971. In the subsequent decades, the growth was very high: for instance, 215 lakhs in 1981, 507 lakhs in 1991, 3,629 lakhs in 2001 and further it has increased to 9,837 lakhs in 2005.10 The large number of telephone connection has also contributed to the generation of e-waste in this country.

# **Mobile Phones**

Since the last decade of the twentieth century, the number of mobile phone connections has increased tremendously. For instance, in 1995, there were 0.3 lakh of mobile phones in our country and the figure has increased to 2.2 lakhs in 1996, 3.39 lakhs in 1997, 8.82 lakhs in 1998, 12 lakhs in 1999 and 18.84 lakhs in 2000. Since the twenty-first century, the number of mobile phones has increased progressively from 35.77 lakhs in 2001, 64.32 lakhs in 2002, 64.32 lakhs in 2002, 129.98 lakhs in 2003, 337.01 lakhs in 2004, 522.10 lakhs in 2005, 930.40 lakhs in 2006 and 1,651.1 lakhs in 2007.11 Since the longevity of the mobile phone is very short (four years), a high rate of growth has also added considerably to the e-waste in recent decades.

## **Televisions**

In India, television was launched in Delhi on 1 November 1959 and later in Mumbai in the year 1972. From 1961 to 1971, only one television relay centre was there and covered only 5 per cent of the country's population.12 During this period, only a small number of households was covered under the television programme. In 1962, only forty-one licenses were issued whereas they increased to 44,855 in 1971.13 However, from 1976 onwards, the number of television relay centres has increased and the proportion of the population under the television coverage has also simultaneously increased. For instance, in 1976, only nine television relay centres were operating in our country and they were covering only about 20 per cent of the population. From 1982 onwards, television programmes were relayed through satellite. Till 1983, there was moderate growth both in terms relay centres (42) and coverage of population (26 per cent). From 1984 onwards, there was a tremendous growth both in the number of relays centres and coverage. Precisely, the number of relay centres was 166 in 1984 and it has increased to 921 in 1997 and then proportion of population

covered under the television was 30 per cent to 87 per cent for the same period.14 As on 1 December 2006, there were about 1,397 transmitters (1,241 national channels, 152 news channels and four metro channels) were in operation in the country and they covered about 91 per cent of the country's population.15 According to MAIT and GTZ estimates, the trend of television sale has increased from 7.6 million in 1995 to 17.0 million in 2007.16 According to the 2001 Census, 60,649,623 (31.6 per cent) of the households had television sets of which, 26,149,263 (18.9 per cent) households were in rural areas and 34,500,360 (64.3 per cent) households were in urban areas. At present, as per latest estimates there are 120 million households in India having television sets. Out of this, there are about 71 million household subscribers of cable television services. Over 220 cable and satellite channels are being made available for regular viewing.17

According to the 2001 Census, about 35 per cent of the households were having the radio sets, 31 per cent television sets and only 9 per cent of the households were having the telephone. In the rural areas, this percentage was about 32, 19 and 4 respectively. Contrastingly, in the urban areas, this proportion was relatively high—45, 64 and 23 per cents respectively (Table 7.2). According to the NSSO Report No. 489: *Housing Condition in India, 2002*, about 62.5 per cent of the households' own radio, transistor, tape-recorder and other music devices. The lower income groups' households are having higher proportion of these devices as against the higher income groups. In other words, higher income groups' households are shifting towards the audio and video devices. On the whole, about 36 per cent of the households are having television of which, only half of the households are connected with cable network.18 It clearly indicates that the growth rate of electrical and electronic products has progressively increased in our country during the last three decades.

| <b>Particulars</b>            | Total       | $\frac{0}{0}$            | Rural       | $\%$ | Urban      | %    |
|-------------------------------|-------------|--------------------------|-------------|------|------------|------|
| Total number<br>of households | 191,963,935 | $\overline{\phantom{0}}$ | 138,271,559 |      | 53,692,376 |      |
| Radio,<br>transistor          | 67,415,133  | 35.1                     | 43,539,732  | 31.5 | 23,875,401 | 44.5 |
| Television                    | 60,649,623  | 31.6                     | 26,149,263  | 18.9 | 34,500,360 | 64.3 |
| Telephone                     | 17,549,991  | 9.1                      | 5,218,884   | 3.8  | 12,331,107 | 23.0 |

**Table 7.2:** Number of Households Having Radio, Transistor, Television and Telephone in India

*Source*: Census of India 2001, *Tables on Household Amenities and Assets*, Government of India, New Delhi.
## *LONGEVITY OF ELECTRONIC GOODS*

The lifespan of electronic goods is short and varied from product to product. The lifespan or end-life of products is estimated differently for different products. According to the UNEP, the life span of personnel computer, monitor and laptop is five to eight years, printer five years, mobile phone four years, television eight years and refrigerator ten years.19 According to Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ) study, the lifespan of a computer is seven years and television refrigerator and washing machine fifteen years. It clearly indicates that the lifespan of electronic goods is four to fifteen years at the maximum. The short lifespan of the electrical and electronical equipment has led to increasing quantities of e-waste.

## *GROWTH OF ELECTRONIC WASTE IN INDIA*

As we have seen, the growth of electronic products has increased progressively while its lifespan is short and that has led to increase of e-waste in recent decades. In 2005, the total WEEE generation in India excluding imports estimated to be 146,180 tonnes per year based on selected EEE tracers' items which is expected to exceed 800,000 tonnes by 2012.20 The quantity of e-waste has increased progressively over the last three decades. According to the UNEP estimates, about 275,000 tonnes of e-waste was generated from TVs, over 101,300 tonnes from refrigerators, 56,300 tonnes from personal computers, 4,700 tonnes from printers and 1,700 tones from mobile phones.<sup>21</sup> It was further estimated that e-waste will be increased in manyfold for the different products by 2020.

#### *MAJOR WEEE GENERATION STATES*

The total WEEE generation in India has been estimated to be 146,180 tonnes per year based on selected EEE tracers' items. This figure does not include WEEE imports.22 Though the e-waste generation is spread over different parts of the country, the following ten states generate a large quantity of e-waste, viz., Maharashtra (20,270.59 tons), Tamil Nadu (13,486.24 tons), Andhra Pradesh (12,780.33 tons), Uttar Pradesh (10,381.11 tons), West Bengal (10,059.36 tons), Delhi (9,729.15 tons), Karnataka (9,118.74 tons), Gujarat (8,994.33 tons), Madhya Pradesh (7,800.62 tons) and Punjab (6,958.46 tons).23

Even among the major WEEE generation states, only a few cities have generated a huge amount of e-waste, viz., Ahmadabad (3,287.5 tones),

Bengaluru (4,648.4 tones), Chennai (4,132.2 tones), Delhi (9,730.3 tones), Hyderabad (2,833.5 tones), Kolkata (4,025.3 tones), Mumbai (11,017.1 tones), Nagpur (1,768.9 tones), Pune (2,584.2 tones) and Surat (1,836.5 tones).<sup>24</sup>

## *ENVIRONMENTAL IMPLICATIONS*

According to the Ministry of Environment and Forests Guidelines (2008), e-wastes contain over 1,000 different substances, many of which are toxic and potentially hazardous to the environment and human health.<sup>25</sup> In the absence of suitable techniques and protective measures, recycling e-waste can result in toxic emissions into the air, water and soil, and pose a serious hazard to health and the environment.<sup>26</sup> Apart from recoverable materials, such as plastic, iron, aluminum, copper and gold, WEEE also contains significant concentration of substances that are hazardous to human health and the environment. Land filling of e-waste can cause leaching of heavy metals, such as mercury, cadmium, and lead, in the land and groundwater.27 The processing of e-waste is largely carried out in an informal sector, which is unregulated and does not follow basic environmental norms. The processes adopted by the sector are rudimentary in nature causing extensive damage to environment and human health. Pollutants reported in WEEE are arsenic, asbestos, barium, brominated flame-proofing agents, cadmium, chrome, cobalt, copper, lead, liquid crystal, lithium, mercury, nickel, polychlorinated biphenyls, selenium, silver, tin and zinc.<sup>28</sup> E-waste constituents and their effect on health in general and desktop components and their effect on health in particular.29 If WEEE is incinerated, the presence of flame inhibitors and chlorine elements in plastic casings of electronics can result in the formation of highly toxic dioxins and furans. Several toxic chemicals and spent over acids after the extraction process are dumped off and drained in the underground aquifers to avoid cost implications of effluent treatment and drainage. It shows that the e-waste not only affects the health of the workers directly but also the entire world of natural resources due to the lack of e-waste management.

## *ELECTRONIC WASTE CONTROL MEASURES*

Until the early twenty-first century, e-waste management issues have not received any attention either from the government or from any other agencies. Indeed, currently India does not have any dedicated legislation dealing with e-waste. Laws having a bearing on e-waste include topics like the environment, water, air, municipal waste and hazardous waste. Indeed, the e-waste problems in India have been analysed since 2003 in conjunction with the Swiss e-waste programme. India's e-waste recycling industry is mainly confined to the informal sector and the regulating mechanisms have been futile.<sup>30</sup> According to the UNEP, there are three barriers to transfer the e-waste technology in India, viz., policy and legislation, technology and skills and business and financing.<sup>31</sup>

According to the UNEP, the policy and legislation barriers are as follows:

- (i) India currently does not have any dedicated legislation dealing with e-waste.
- (ii) Laws having a bearing on e-waste include topics like the environment, water, air, municipal waste and hazardous waste. E-waste handling is currently regulated under the Hazardous Waste Management and Handling rules.
- (iii) Application procedures to obtain export licenses for the shipment of some special fractions of e-waste to state-of-the-art smelters abroad are unclear.
- (iv) Application of the Basel Convention is unclear.
- (v) High level of corruption in law enforcement.
- (vi) No definition of roles and responsibilities of stakeholders.

The technology and skills barriers include:

- (i) E-waste recycling sector dominated by the informal sector.
- (ii) Low technologies are applied by low-skilled workers, resulting in high health and environment risks, including open-sky incineration and wet chemical leaching of metals.
- (iii) No proper solution for hazardous fractions contained in e-waste.

The business and financing barriers are:

- (i) Logistics, especially collection and transport, are the main challenges for the formal recycling sector.
- (ii) Difficulties to access the materials and direct competition with the informal sector.
- (iii) All costs, including collection, transport and disposal of hazardous fractions at the charge of the recyclers.
- (iv) No secure financing of non-profitable recycling operations.<sup>32</sup>

The government of India has not initiated any specific act to control the e-waste but some measures were initiated in other acts to control the e-waste problem. For instance, the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, is one such act.

### **The Environment (Protection) Act, 1986**

The Environment (Protection) Act, 1986,<sup>33</sup> has emphasised upon 'the protection and improvement of environment and the prevention of hazards to human beings, other living creatures, plants and property.' Under this act, Section 3(1) states that the Central Government shall have the power to take all such measures as it deems necessary or expedient for the purpose of protecting and improving the quality of the environment and preventing, controlling and abating environmental pollution. Section 3(2)(vii) emphases upon laying down procedures and safeguards for the handling of hazardous substances.

Under Section 5, the Central Government has the power to issue directions for (a) the closure, prohibition or regulation of any industry, operation or process; or (b) stoppage or regulation of the supply of electricity or water or any other service. Further, under Section 6(2), the Central Government has power to make (c) the procedures and safeguards for the handling of hazardous substances;(d) the prohibition and restrictions on the handling of hazardous substances in different areas. Section 8 says that no person shall handle or cause to be handled any hazardous substance except in accordance with such procedure and after complying with such safeguards as may be prescribed. Under Section 25 (2)[b], the Central Government has the power to make the procedure in accordance with and the safeguards in compliance with which hazardous substances shall be handled or caused to be handled under Section 8.

## Hazardous Wastes (Management and Handling) Rules<sup>34</sup>

Based on the provisions of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, the Hazardous Wastes (Management and Handling) Rules, 1989, was formulated on 28 July 1989. According to the rules, occupiers generating hazardous wastes given in the list shall take all practical steps to ensure that such wastes are properly handled, i.e., collection, reception, treatment, storage and disposed of without any adverse effects to human health and environment Rule (4). Rule (4) states:

The occupier generating hazardous wastes listed in column (2) of the Schedule in quantities equal to or exceeding the limits given in

column (3) of the said Schedule, shall take all practical steps to ensure that such wastes are properly handled and disposed of without any adverse effects which may result from such wastes and the occupier shall also be responsible for proper collection, reception, treatment, storage and disposal of these wastes either himself or through the operator of a facility.35

Under Rule (22), grants will be provided for the collection, treatment, storage and disposal of hazardous wastes. Before hazardous waste is delivered at the hazardous waste site, the occupier or operator of a facility shall ensure that the hazardous wastes is packaged in a manner suitable for storage and transport and the labelling and packaging shall be easily visible and be able to withstand physical conditions and climate factors (31). Import of hazardous wastes from any country to India shall not be permitted for dumping and disposal of such wastes. However, import of such wastes may be allowed for processing or re-use as raw material, after examining each case on merit by the State Pollution Control Board or by an officer authorised in this behalf (38).

Hazardous Wastes (Management and Handling) Rules were amended in 2000:

At present there are approximately 9,000 units in the country which utilize hazardous wastes and nearly 10,000 authorizations for import of hazardous waste were made by the government. Till now, not a single waste disposal site has been located in the country so far.<sup>36</sup>

Hence, the Supreme Court has directed that no import should be made or permitted to be made by the Government of any hazardous waste material which was already banned under the International Basel Convention or to be banned by the convention hereafter with effect from the date specified therein. Based on this, the Hazardous Wastes (Management and Handling) Rules, 1989, was amended in 2000. Accordingly, 'Import of hazardous wastes from any country to India and export of hazardous wastes from India to any country for dumping or disposal shall not be permitted.'37

Under this Rule, the biomedical wastes covered under the Biomedical Wastes (Management and Handling) Rules, 1998; wastes covered under the Municipal Solid Wastes (Management and Handling) Rules, 2000; and the lead-acid batteries covered under the Batteries (Management and Handling) Rules, 2001 were also covered. Under this Rule, import or export of hazardous wastes or substances containing or contaminated with such hazardous wastes is prohibited. Further, this rule emphasised that:

(1) Every occupier seeking to import hazardous wastes shall apply to the State Pollution Control Board/Committee 120 days in advance of the intended date of commencement of the shipment in Form 6 for permission to import hazardous wastes along with an application fee, as may be prescribed by the State pollution Control Board/ Committee to the Member-Secretary, State Pollution Control Board/ Committee or any officer designated by the Pollution Control Board/ Committee<sup>38</sup>

It also emphasised that '[a]n occupier importing hazardous wastes listed under Open General License of the Directorate General of Foreign Trade is required to be registered with the Ministry of Environment and Forests in accordance with the procedure laid down under rule 19.'39 In addition to this, both state- and central-level institutions were given responsibilities to control the wastes.

Under this rule, it is mandatory for any person handling hazardous wastes to obtain authorisation of the State Pollution Control Board for collection, reception, storage, transportation, treatment and disposal of such wastes. Precisely, until 2010, e-waste was regulated/controlled under the provisions Hazardous Waste (Management and Handling) Rules of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.

# *FEATURES OF THE E-WASTE (MANAGEMENT AND HANDLING) RULES, 2010*

Till 2010, e-waste management was dealt with under the provisions of Hazardous Waste (Management and Handling) Rules of Environmental Protection Act, 1986. There is no specific act or rules were enacted to handle the e-waste. Based on the provisions of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, and the E-Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 2010, the government is making pioneering effort to handle the e-waste. This rule brought under its purview each and every entity who is associated with the IT and telecommunication equipment and consumer electrical and electronic and goods. These rules shall apply to every producer(s), distributor(s), collection centre(s), refurbisher(s), dismantler(s), recycler(s), consumer(s) or bulk consumer(s) involved in the manufacture, sale and purchase and processing of electrical and electronic equipment or components of IT and telecommunication equipment and consumer electrical and electronics. The rules cover the following IT and telecommunication equipment centralised data processing: mainframes, minicomputers, personal computing; personal computers (CPU with input and output devices), laptop (CPU with input

and output devices), notebook, notepad etc., printers including cartridges, copying equipment, electrical and electronic typewriters, pocket and desk calculators. And other products and equipment for the collection, storage, processing, presentation or communication of information by electronic means, user terminals and systems facsimile, telex, telephones, pay telephones, cordless telephones, cellular telephones answering systems, and other products or equipment of transmitting sound, images or other information by telecommunications. The consumer electrical and electronics category includes television sets (including LCD and LED), refrigerators, washing machines, and air-conditioners.

Under the Rule (4), the producer responsible has to collect the e-waste during the manufacturing process and send it either for recycling or disposal; they have to collect the product at the 'end of life' and ensure that it has to reach the registered refurbisher or dismantler or recycler; they have to establish a collection centre either individually or collectively; to meet the cost, they have to make provisions for financing and organising a system either individually or collectively; they have to provide contact details of distributors and authorised collection centres to consumer; and they have to distribute e-waste awareness information along with the equipment.

Under the Rule (5), the distributors are responsible to collect the e-waste from the consumers and transport either to the producer or authorised collection centre. Under Rule (6), refurbisher has to collect e-waste generated during the process of refurbishing and send the waste to producer or authorised collection centre or dismantler or recycler. E-waste collection centre's responsibility is to ensure that the e-waste collected by them is stored in a secured manner till these can be sent to the producer or refurbisher or registered dismantler or recycler. Under the Rule (7), consumer's responsibility is to ensure that the e-waste is deposited with either the distributor or collection centres. The bulk consumer responsibility is to make sure that the e-waste is deposited with the distributor or authorised collection centres or refurbisher or registered dismantler or recyclers (8).

Under the Rule (9), dismantler's responsibility is to ensure that the environment and health should not be affected and they have to ensure that the dismantling facility. Further, they have to ensure that dismantled e-waste is segregated and sent to the registered recycling facilities for recovery of materials and the non-recyclable/non-ecoverable components are sent to authorised treatment storage and disposal facilities. The recycler/reprocessor responsibility is to ensure that residue generated thereof is disposed of in a hazardous waste treatment storage disposal facility (10). Under this rule, except consumer, all others have to register with the State Pollution Control Board have to submit an

annual returns statement to the above board on or before 30 June of every year. In addition to that, they have to keep the records related to the handling of e-waste. Thus, the e-waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 2010, regulate not only the producers but also recyclers and other intermediaries, viz., distributors, refurbishers, bulk consumers and dismantlers. However, the e-waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 2010, shall come into force with effect from 1 January 2012.

#### *CONCLUSION*

While encouraging the electrical and electronical products during the last three and half decades, the government has failed to manage the e-waste that has resulted in ecological and environmental degradation. Whatever little measures were initiated to control the e-waste management have not made any serious impact and that has led to the threat to the natural resources as well as public health. Due to the technological advancement in the consumer electronic appliances industry, the old and outdated products turned into wastes and their numbers are increasing alarmingly. Thus, this chapter, therefore, argues that the tremendous growth of e-waste during the last three and half decades, without a proper e-waste management rules in place, has caused a sizeable damage to the ecology, environment and public health.

# *NOTES AND REFERENCES*

- 1 The earlier version of the chapter was presented at a national seminar on 'E-Waste Management and Recycling in India-Issues and Challenges', organised by the Department of Economics, Jamia Millia Islamia, New Delhi, 17–18 March 2011.
- 2 UNEP, *E-waste: Volume I: Inventory Assessment Manual,* United Nations Environment Programme (2007), 12.
- 3 Ibid., 12–16.
- 4 Ibid.
- 5 Ministry of Environment & Forests and Central Pollution Control Board, 'Guidelines for Environmentally Sound Management of E-waste' (Delhi, 2008), 1.
- 6 A. Jain, 'E-waste in South Asia', paper presented at the '3R South Asia Expert Workshop', organised by Institute for Global Environmental Strategies, Japan; Asian Development Bank, UNEP, held International Center for Mountain Development (ICIMOD), Kathmandu, Nepal, 30 August 2006–1 September 2006, 3.
- 7 UNEP, *E-waste: Volume* I, 12.