# **5 Institutional responses to the decline of ethics in governance in a historical perspective**

History has shown that efforts have constantly been made to arrest systemic degradation. As the argument runs, systems are bound to falter for contextual reasons, while they are articulating their ideological priorities. What is thus needed is to evolve effective mechanisms to halt the debasement that a system suffers from time to time. This is a powerful lesson of history: it cannot be disputed, because the roots of the derailment of the system are too well entrenched to be eradicated easily. This is a view that also draws our attention to the wider socio- economic and political milieu in which the reasons for the systemic failure are located. Despite the fact that the dislocation of the system has its roots in the immediate context, the importance of the wider environment to which the system is organically linked cannot be ruled out. The processes leading to the deviation of the system from the fundamental canons of ethics in governance are complex. It is now accepted that a decline in any system is inevitable, since the environment in which the system is located is not perfect. So, the problem and its source have been identified. This is one part of the story. The other part – underlining the efforts against tendencies to undermine, if not derail, the system – is about those major serious attempts which seek to re- establish the values of ethics in governance as perhaps most useful in realizing the core beliefs of liberal democracy.

 What is fundamental here is that the challenges from the reduction of ethics in public life usually refuel the debate, which is always helpful in reconceptualizing the approaches and tools of analysis. As will be shown below, institutional decay and social degradation are dialectically connected: the former is as much a push- factor as an outcome of the processes, which are rooted in the wider social environment. This makes the situation far more complicated, because institutions contribute to significant changes by playing defining roles; similarly, society is a source of dramatic flux in institutions when it accommodates new demands, which are usually articulated by various types of social movement. As an ongoing process, governance is being constantly reinvented, sometime for internal reasons, sometime as a result of external pressure. The purpose is to uphold the publicness of public authority, which, if compromised, strikes at its foundation. Solutions must be found; otherwise, the edifice of governance crumbles. Given the contextual complexities in which governance

unfolds, there cannot be tailor- made solutions to the problems responsible for government derailment; this idea is supported by the failure of the so- called universal models of governance, sponsored by the World Bank, to arrest the decadence in governance in a large number of developing countries. What it reemphasizes is the fact that, since problems have clear contextual roots, solutions are to be identified by keeping in view the contextual peculiarities of the system, which can never be comprehended through derived wisdom.

 Historically speaking, there are two major ways in which governance loses its public character. On the one hand, corruption and malpractices, which are always hailed by vested interests as complementary to the gratification of partisan interests, continue to plague governance to a significant extent in most developing countries, including India. On the other hand, the slackening of governance is also due to the misuse of public authority through circumstances in which the political leadership conveniently bypasses even its constitutional obligations to pursue and fulfil private goals and objectives, at the cost of those of the governed. This is indicative of the decline in ethics in governance. Disheartened by the distortions in governance, S Radhakrishnan, who became India's President in 1962, thus suggested in as early as 1947 that

unless we destroy corruption in high places, root out every trace of nepotism, love of power, profiteering and black marketing which have spoiled the good name of this great country in recent times, we will not be able to raise the standards of efficiency of administration as well as in the production and distribution of the necessary goods in life.1

Governance is thus not so much an instrument for public well- being, as an apparatus for self- gratification for those in power and authority.

 Implicit in the above argument is an insistence on institutional devices to contain the derailment in governance; this further requires resistance when governance is appropriated by vested interests. It is difficult to capture those challenges in a chapter, given the paucity of space. Hence this chapter selectively focuses on three major endeavours that the government of independent India undertook to address the sources of the decline of ethics in governance. The aim was identical, because all these efforts were directed at reforming governance, which had significantly lost its public character. Reasons for the governmental degradation, however, varied: while the 1977 Shah Commission attributed the decline in ethics in governance to the deliberate misuse of power due to the arrogance of the prevalent political leadership in view of the numerical majority that it had in parliament, the 1962 Santhanam Committee and the 2005 Second Administrative Reforms Commission, also known as the Moily Commission, focussed on increasing corruption in public life as being responsible for its decadence.

 Constituted in 1962, the Santhanam Committee was the first of its kind, because corruption in public offices did not seem to have received so much attention in the past. Unlike the Shah Commission or the Second Administrative Commission, the aim of the Santhanam Committee was also to create an environment in which bribery and corruption would not flourish. The report was an eye- opener, although, by providing purely institutional solutions to the debasement of public authority, the Committee did not seem to have paid adequate attention to the social roots of the phenomenon.

 For the Shah Commission, the debasement of public authority was conditioned by circumstances, being supported by the rise of a dictatorial leadership. As the Commission saw, there was neither a military coup nor the consolidation of an extra- constitutional authoritarianism that usually contribute to the rise of an absolutist political authority; the design that justified the misuse of public authority was absolutely constitutional. Guaranteed by the Constitution of India, the then Congress leadership at the behest of its leader, Indira Gandhi, resorted to specific constitutional provision to create and consolidate what could be readily characterized as constitutional authoritarianism. The Shah Commission report is a thorough statement of how public authority was misused at the drop of a hat during the two- year period, between 1975 and 1977, when a constitutional Emergency was declared to quell opposition to the ruling authority. Besides narrating how authority was personalized and political leadership became hegemonic in public life, the Commission also reiterates that the decline of ethics in public authority can be conclusively arrested once the Constitution of India reigns supreme in so far as governance is concerned.

 In contrast to the Shah Commission, which was constituted to look into the excesses committed by the existing ruling authority, the 2005 Moily Commission, as the Second Administrative Reforms Commission was known, obviously had had a wider mandate. Like the Santhanam Committee, it was also aware that, unless there was a robust culture of integrity, it would be difficult for the institutional mechanisms to take root. The crux of ethics in public life does not entail the mere declaration of a commitment to ethical behaviour, but its adoption in one's behaviour while discharging public roles. Corruption is a deviant behaviour that can successfully be tackled by (a) strengthening institutional checks and balances; and (b) creating a culture of integrity. So, while devising mechanisms to arrest administrative decline in India, the Second Administrative Commission, unlike the other two interventions, seems to have taken a wider view of the phenomenon by being sensitive to India's peculiar socio- political compulsions. Conceptually, this was most innovative attempt, since it paid adequate attention to the social factors behind the decline of ethics in governance in India. The decline had a very distinct contextual flavour, and cannot be persuasively explained in terms of the derivative models highlighting institutional decay.

 By thoroughly analysing the reports of these three important government initiatives in independent India, the chapter argues that institutional reforms may not be a sufficiently appropriate shield against the debasement of governance in India. What is required is to create an environment in which public authorities with a tendency towards appropriating benefits for themselves are despised and hated. So, there has to be a cultural solution along with the creation of appropriate

institutional mechanisms that are strong enough to contain corruption and malpractices in governance. The aim of this chapter is to lay out the arguments that these Commissions made while dealing with the decline of ethics in governance and also to assess them with reference to a context which was not inclined in favour of creating a robust culture of integrity. By dwelling on each of the reports separately, the chapter further makes the point that what links all these efforts, despite their being prepared in different eras, was their concern for ethics in governance which, it was strongly felt, had been considerably eroded in independent India.

 Divided into two parts – Part A and Part B – this chapter is a thorough study of the reports that specific Commissions/Committees prepared to weed out corruption from public life and create an institutional fabric supportive of a robust culture of integrity. The chapter makes two arguments, one historical and the other conceptual. The argument hinges on the ideas that the approach to the issues of ethics and integrity is history specific and that the conceptual understanding of the phenomenon evolved accordingly. The discussion in Part A revolves around the Licence–Quota–Permit Raj as the possible root cause of corruption in public authority, since it encouraged the unrestricted discretionary power of public personnel, usually exercised in exchange for a premium. Part B, which seeks to conceptualize the derailment of public authority in the context of a globalizing India, dwells on the phenomenon against the background of a completely different socio- ideological milieu, which was appreciative of the gradual opening up of the Indian economy. Besides accepting the importance of the institutional mechanisms in containing corruption and malpractices in governance, the new era also emphasised the role of other social actors in transforming the environment, a role in which the concern for ethics and integrity in governance reigned supreme. Although the discussion is formatted chronologically, there is a common conceptual theme that links Parts A and B that, regardless of the radical changes in India's ideological texture following the acceptance of the 1991 New Economic Policy, the governments that followed have paid considerable attention to the containment of corruption and those indulging in malpractices for self- aggrandizement.

## **PART A**

## **The Santhanam Committee and the Shah Commission: institutional counters to corruption and malpractices in governance**

Corruption is unavoidable in governance, as history has shown. Is it due to lack of public morality or institutional decadence or both? Explanations vary, although there is hardly any disagreement about the fact that corruption is omnipresent in public life. While seeking to understand the nature of corruption in India, her erstwhile Prime Minister argued that

there is no protection if the fence starts eating the crops. We have government servants who do not serve but oppress the poor and helpless . . . who do not uphold the law . . . but connive with those who cheat the State and whole legions whose only concern is their private welfare at the cost of society. They have no work ethics, no feeling for the public cause, no involvement in the future of the nation, no comprehension of the national goals, [and] no commitment to the values of modern India. They have only a grasping mercenary outlook, devoid of competence, integrity and commitment.2

This is a most revealing statement underlining the decadence of the system of governance that India has endured since independence. The problem is clearly internal, since it is the public officials who are condemned as corrupt because of their scant respect for the fundamental principles of ethics in governance. Public authorities have ceased to be public, given their pronounced lack of commitment to public well- being or enthusiasm for fulfilling their partisan interests and the sacrifice of their public missions. What was stated at the highest level of governance in 1985 was echoed in the Tenth Plan (2002–2007) that, by pinpointing the overall decadence in public life, argued that

while the functions of the State in India have steadily widened, capacity to deliver has steadily declined over the years due to administrative cynicism, rising indiscipline and a growing perception that the political and bureaucratic elite views the state as an area where public service is to be used for private ends. In almost all [Indian provinces], people perceive bureaucracy as wooden, disinterested in public welfare and corrupt. . . . Weak governance, manifesting itself in poor service delivery, excessive regulation and uncoordinated and wasteful public expenditure, is seen as one of the key factors impinging on growth and development.3

The idea that corruption is a threat to public authority was pursued with increasing zeal in the Eleventh Plan as well. While probing into what ails governance in India, it was thus mentioned that 'corruption . . . that has assumed serious dimensions in public services . . . is a major factor in the wastefulness, inefficiency and inequities we find in public administration [in India] today'.4 As will be discussed later in this chapter, the derailment of public services in India was a source of concern for the Second Administrative Reforms Commission, which also made a thorough analysis of the phenomenon in one of its reports. The fact that corruption figured prominently in the government discourses also suggests that it had not escaped public notice; the voluminous reports that were produced since independence to address the issue are a testimony to the seriousness with which the government sought to understand the issues. By providing a critical analysis of two important reports – the 1964 Santhanam Committee Report and the 1977 Shah Commission Report – this chapter is about the institutional mechanisms that the Indian policy makers used to arrest the growing incidence of corruption, in a context in which the state's hegemony was hardly questioned.

 One of the earlier attempts to meaningfully address the issue of administrative corruption was made in 1964, when the Government of India constituted a fully fledged committee to look into the phenomenon of the corruption that was assumed to have significantly crippled governance as an instrument for public well- being. Headed by K Santhanam, a member of the lower house of the Indian parliament, the committee is perhaps one of the first serious endeavours to understand and combat the menace of corruption. Appointed by the parliament, the committee was given very specific tasks in the terms and conditions of its appointment:5

- to examine the organization, set- up, functions and responsibilities of the vigilance units in the ministries and departments of the Government of India and to suggest measures to make them more effective;
- to examine the organization, strength, procedures and methods of work of the special police establishment and the difficulties experienced by it, and to suggest measures to further improve its functioning;
- to consider and suggest steps to be taken to emphasize the responsibilities of each department for checking corruption;
- to suggest changes in law that would ensure speedy trial of cases of bribery, corruption and criminal misconduct, and make the laws otherwise more effective;
- to examine the rules relating to disciplinary proceedings and to consider what changes are necessary in order to expedite these proceedings and to make them more effective;
- to suggest measures calculated to produce a social climate both amongst public servants and in the general public in which bribery and corruption may not flourish;
- to examine the government servants' conduct rules and to recommend changes necessary for ensuring maintenance of absolute integrity in the public services;
- to suggest steps for securing public support for anti- corruption measures; and
- to consider special measures that may be necessary in corporate public undertakings to secure honesty and integrity amongst their employees.

As the terms of appointment suggest, there were three complementary tasks that the Committee was asked to undertake: to conceptualize the nature of corruption in public life; to suggest specific laws to combat that corruption, identified as a key to the deterioration of values in public life; and, given the clear social roots of corruption, to create an environment in which corruption and malpractices would be considered serious aberrations in a value- driven public life and thus to be abhorred. Since it was a parliamentary committee and was formed following a declaration by the then Minister for Home Affairs Lal Bahadur Shastri, it had the backing of parliamentarians, who appeared to have been equally alarmed at the pace at which corruption was becoming part of public life. So, the appointment of the Santhanam Committee was a wake- up call in response to a public outcry against corruption and the undermining of ethics in governance.

 For the Committee, corruption connoted the 'improper or selfish exercise of power and influence attached to a public office or to the special position one occupies in public life'.6 It was aware that corruption, as was explained above, needed to be conceptualized as a social phenomenon rooted in the wider social, economic and political milieu. This was not, however, the task that the Committee was given; what it was expected to do was to understand the phenomenon with reference to the Union Government, which had apparently lost its vitality due to corruption. Guided by this vision, the approach that the Committee had adopted was clearly institution- based and also clearly Weberian because it drew upon the belief that the systemic decay could be arrested by ascertaining internal accountability. The argument was simple: the rising importance of corruption in public life was proportionately linked to the weaknesses of the mechanisms for internal accountability. So, the solution was to strengthen the mechanisms where they existed and put them in place where they did not.

 Corruption had historical roots. As Committee felt, 'the high water- mark of corruption was reached in India . . . during the Second World War [since] . . . propriety of means was no consideration if it impeded the war effort'.7 This was perhaps the beginning of what gradually became a source of concern, as it challenged the foundational ethical principles of public administration in India. What accounts for the growing incidence of corruption? In the Committee's view, 'where there is power and discretion, there is always the possibility of abuse, more so when the power and discretion have to be exercised in the context of scarcity and controls and pressure to spend public money'.8 While it would not be possible, as the Committee understood, 'to completely eliminate discretion, it should be possible to devise a system of administration which would reduce to the minimum . . . the need for exercise of personal discretion consistent with efficiency and speedy disposal of public business'.9 What was most alarming was the attempt to short- circuit governmental procedure by offering bribes, which the Committee characterized as 'speed money' – an amount given to government officers by those seeking to bypass the procedures of administration. It was a means to avoid the cumbersome procedures to arrive at a decision. Speed money was, as the Committee reported, 'a fairly common type of corrupt practice particularly in matters of granting of licenses and permits'.10 As the Committee further noted, '[t]he anxiety to avoid delay has encouraged the growth of dishonest practices like the system of speed money. . . . Generally the bribe giver does not wish, in these case, to get anything done unlawfully, but wants to speed up the process of the movement of the files and communications relating to decision . . . even by bypassing the normal procedures, if necessary'.11 A product of the famously construed 'License–Quota–Permit Raj',12 speed money created a quid pro quo arrangement whereby both the benefit seeker and giver gained advantage. Hence the arrangement continued at a cost to the system, because of the loss of vitality, which was not a deterrent to those willing to make the system captive for their personal gain.

 According to the Committee, the willingness to corrupt and the capacity to corrupt go hand in hand. This was a menace that was found in large measure in

the industrial and commercial classes. In the Permit Raj, they flourished by indulging

in evasion and avoidance of taxes . . . by various methods such as obtaining licenses in the names of bogus firms and individuals, trafficking in licenses, suppressing profits by manipulation of accounts to avoid taxes and other legitimate claims on profits, accepting money for transactions put through without accounting for it in bills and accounts, and under- valuation of transactions in immovable property.13

Corruption thus became integral to commercial transactions; in fact, it was perhaps the most effective means, the Committee was surprised to notice, 'to get things done'.14 Hence it was suggested that the only way to eliminate corruption was to 'fight these unscrupulous agencies of corruption'.15 The most devastating impact of widespread corruption was manifested in the public 'losing faith in the integrity of public administration',16 and the idea that public administration functioned only through corrupt practices gained ground. Here two points seem critical: on the one hand, it was firmly established that excessive state control enabled 'the middle men' to be effective, because of their access to those responsible for the issue of licenses and the granting of other facilities; on the other hand, their rise seemed to have been helped by the apparent slackening of the efforts of the government machinery to contain such tendencies.

## **How to combat corruption?**

With an extensive study of the roots of corruption, the Santhanam Committee drew the conclusion that corruption in governance is rooted in 'wide discretionary powers which are exercised by the executive in carrying on the complicated work of modern administration'.17 Once the root of corruption was located, it was easier for the Committee to devise mechanisms for its eradication. The Committee thus suggested two types of mechanism: on the one hand, in order to arrest the institutional decay resulting from the lack of integrity of the personnel, the Committee recommended an institutional agency to take punitive measures against errant government and public sector employees if their complicity with corruption was proved. The Committee was of the view that since 'the detection, investigation and punishment of corruption and misuse of authority by individual government servants is of utmost importance'18 for a vibrant public administration, there was a need for a powerful institution to be responsible for punishing the deviants. Following this sentiment, the Committee recommended the setting up of a Central Vigilance Commission with a branch that would deal with general complaints and redress and another to deal with vigilance activities. This was an improvement on what had existed in the past: as part of the Ministry of Home Affairs, the previous Administrative Vigilance Division had been authorized to look into the cases of alleged corruption in public personnel associated with the Home Ministry, whereas the Central Vigilance Commission was legally authorized to deal with cases in each and every department and also in the public sector units within the government. Besides its expanded scope of function, the Vigilance Commission was also an independent organization with an exclusive task. The Committee also felt the need to strengthen the existing Special Police Establishment to intensify the action against bribery and corruption. For the Committee, despite being endowed with adequate legal power, the Special Police Establishment lacked the power because it did not receive as much attention from the political authority as had been expected. It was thus recommended that it get support from the government to make it self- sustaining; otherwise, the basic purpose of its creation was likely to be defeated.

 Besides suggesting the creation of an institution meant exclusively for handling the cases of corruption and strengthening the Special Police Establishment, the Santhanam Committee also recommended revamping the wider sociopolitical environment which is a key to ensuring the probity in public services. The Committee was alarmed to notice that

there is a widespread impression that failure of integrity is not uncommon even among the Ministers and some Ministers who have held office during the last 16 years have enriched themselves illegitimately, obtained good jobs for their sons and relations through nepotism, and have reaped other advantages inconsistent with any notion of purity in public life.19

According to the Committee, absolute integrity on the part of the ministers who were supposed to set the trend in public life was an indispensable condition for the establishment of a tradition of probity in public life. The institutional mechanisms that the Committee had proposed would be futile unless there existed a social climate in which corruption was despised and those indulging in corruption were hated and socially ostracized. The Committee felt that, by setting healthy precedents, public office holders could create an environment supportive of integrity in public governance. The ministers were required to be impeccably honest and thus incorruptible; otherwise, public administration could never become an instrument to ensure public well- being. Tuned to the Weberian preference for mechanisms of internal accountability to ascertain ethics in governance, the Santhanam Committee suggested the following steps,20 which were critical in fulfilling the core principles of public administration:

- A code of conduct for ministers . . . relating to acquisition of property, acceptance of gifts and disclosure of assets and liabilities should be drawn up. This code of conduct should be placed before Parliament and State Legislatures. The Prime Minister and Chief Ministers should be responsible for enforcing the code of conduct.
- A specific allegation of corruption on the part of a Minister at the Centre or in a State should be promptly investigated by an agency whose findings would command respect. We recognize that irresponsible allegations cannot be taken serious note of. We therefore suggest that if a formal allegation is

made by any ten members of Parliament or a Legislature in writing addressed to the Prime Minister or Chief Minister, through the Speakers, . . . the Prime Minister or Chief Minister should consider himself obliged, by convention, to refer the allegations for immediate investigation by a Committee, constituted for this purpose.

 This would be in addition to the responsibilities of the Prime Minister and Chief Minister of States to take note of allegations made in the Press or which otherwise come to their notice. In respect of such allegations also the Prime Minister and Chief Ministers should be free to refer the matter to the proposed Committee. In all other cases, the Minister against whom the allegations are made should, as a rule, institute legal proceedings by filing a complaint for criminal defamation and the Minister concerned should be given legitimate assistance by the Government of which they are Ministers.

• In cases, where the Ministers are unwilling to take legal action, the Prime Minister or the Chief Ministers of States, as the case may be, should consider themselves obliged by convention, unless there is irrefutable proof of the integrity of the Minister concerned, to advise the President or the Governor, as the case may be, to withdraw his pleasure which would mean that the Minister will have to go out of office unless he himself resigns.

Apart from the ministers, the integrity of the members of parliament and state legislatures was, the Committee felt, integral to the creation of a social climate against corruption and malpractices in governance. Besides suggesting a code of conduct for the legislators, the Committee empowered the parliamentary Committee of Privileges to enquire into cases of corruption involving the lawmakers. Once guilt was proved, the members had no option but to quit and to face the consequences for their breach of conduct. The idea was to control deviant behaviour through punitive actions. Again, what guided the Committee was the fact that, once a precedent had been established, the legislators were likely to behave in such a fashion as to generate respect from the stakeholders for their conduct. Implicit here was also the hope that punitive actions against the errant legislators were sure to cause damage to their social standing, which they would want to avoid at any cost. That would be far more effective, the Committee underlined, with an alert media spreading the message to the public. So, in the scheme of things that the Committee sought to create, the media was also a critical player in ensuring ethics in governance.

 The Santhanam recommendations are in a class by themselves simply because, besides suggesting a formula for strengthening the institutional fabric of governance, they also talked about a conducive social environment in which corruption cannot flourish. They are also a class part because they referred to an important source of corruption, which is being talked about with even greater emphasis in the twenty- first century: it is strongly believed that corruption in governance will disappear to a significant extent once public funding of elections is accepted as a principle. The Committee thus noted that 'the public belief in the prevalence of corruption at high political levels has been strengthened by the manner in which funds are collected by political parties, especially at the time of elections'.21 As is evident, fighting an election is an expensive proposition and the parties in the fray raise funds, through legal and illegal means, to take care of the expensive campaign that they undertake. Corporations and businessmen always come up with the offer of funds to support the candidates in the hope that, once they are elected, they would act as their representatives when a favour is sought. It was therefore essential, as the Committee stated, that 'the conduct of political parties should be regulated in this matter by strict principles in relation to collection of funds and electioneering'.22 Debarring corporations from supporting the candidates financially, the Committee insisted that 'funds for fighting elections should come openly from supporters and sympathizers'.23 This was a powerful recommendation with future implications, because one of the major sources of corruption in India was election funding by private enterprises. With their liberal funding of the election campaigns of political parties, corporations create a symbiotic network with the candidates, which they squeeze once their chosen ones are in power. Usually, when it comes to funding, businesses do not appear to discriminate between the parties because the outcome of an election generally remains uncertain. This is an unwritten rule that seems to govern the system of election funding in India. This is also an effective strategy that always places private interests at an advantage when it comes to the extraction of benefits from those holding political power.

 An analytical scan of the recommendations reveal that institutional protections do not seem to be adequate in containing corruption to a significant extent unless they are equally strongly backed by a social climate in which corruption is hated and hence has no chance to flourish. In the ultimate analysis, the role of the public is critical in sustaining a propitious environment, supportive of high moral values, for creating and consolidating an edifice of governance drawing on them. This is what came out when the Committee suggested that 'it is desirable to create a situation in which those officials who have been found guilty of corruption feel not only that they have lost their jobs but also feel socially degraded'.24 Emphasizing the importance of public opinion against persons who indulged in corruption, the Committee thus reiterated a fundamental principle of public administration, which always gave supremacy to the public to ensure its core.

 Corruption in India acquired the status of folklore, as Gunnar Myrdal argued while seeking to understand the peculiar nature of India's development trajectory. As folklore, it has, as Myrdal further argued, 'a crucial bearing on how people conduct their private lives and how they view their government's efforts to consolidate the nation and to direct and spur development'.25 As corruption was integrally connected with Indian public life, so were efforts towards understanding and also effectively combatting the phenomenon. So if corruption was an action, to use a metaphor from Newtonian laws of gravity, anti- corruption campaigns were a reaction. The 1964 Santhanam Committee needs to be conceptualized in this context. Corruption raised its ugly head to the certain detriment of the system that the founding fathers sought to build; it also led to various efforts aimed at eradicating its sources. It was more or less accepted by the

people at large that corruption was a way of life – or, to use Myrdal's expression, folklore – which was so deeply entrenched in Indian administration and its socio- political milieu that it cannot be rooted out. In such an atmosphere, the recommendations that the Santhanam Committee made were most refreshing for two reasons: on the one hand, by seeking to refashion the prevalent system of administration, the Committee suggested several institutional mechanisms which, despite having figured in public discourse, had never received governmental support. In that sense, the Committee was a very crucial intervention in administrative reforms, in accordance with the public desire to govern ethically and constitutionally. Mere institutional reforms are not effective. Hence the Santhanam Committee emphasized, on the other hand, the importance of the social climate in creating and consolidating the forces that were challenging those who flourished by being corrupt.

 What is most striking is the fact that the 1964 Santhanam Committee had, besides devising preventive institutional instruments, also set in motion processes whereby corruption was to be analysed in perhaps its most complex manifestation. Its contextual roots were located in the License–Quota–Permit Raj, in which functionaries of government bureaucracy held disproportionate power over granting licences and permits. So, a controlled polity led to the creation of a corrupt regime. This was possible because, as the Committee further argued, the prevalent social climate supported corruption in growing organic roots in Indian society. By striving to locate the social roots of corruption, the Committee made recommendations which were thus transcendental; corruption continues to remain a serious menace to governance, though its nature has undergone a sea change, as will be shown below in the consideration of the report of the 2005 Second Administrative Reforms Commission. In conceptualizing ethics in governance, what always remains critical is the role of the social climate in creating an ambience in which values for ethics in governance are not only well entrenched, but are also strong enough to evolve complementary practices in its support. By being sensitive to this aspect, the Santhanam Committee has made a very useful contribution to comprehend and also to conceptualize how corruption and the decline of ethics were dialectically inter- connected in the specific historical context of India. The recommendations are not entirely contextual, but transcend the historical era by drawing our attention to the social roots of corruption. Thus a fundamental theoretical formulation for the eradication of corruption is conceptually possible once this is accepted as a social goal. In other words, once corruption loses its social backing, it can never be a threat to governance because, for those involved in its execution, it becomes, instead of being a source of self- gratification, a source of hatred and social degradation.

## **The Shah Commission: an antidote to privatization of governance**

Appointed in 1977 in the aftermath of the end of the Emergency in which democracy had been shelved, the Shah Commission was constituted to look into the excesses that the ruling authority had indulged in. There were cases of gross violation of constitutional propriety while fulfilling personal whims, especially by those who held the highest constitutional positions in India. The Commission was thus

to inquire into several aspects of allegations of abuse of authority, excesses and malpractices committed and action taken or purported to be taken in the wake of the Emergency proclaimed on the 26th of June, 1975 under Article 352 of the Constitution of [India].26

The Commission was, it was further stated, 'also not concerned to determine the infraction of any laws involving imposition of any penalty upon a person charged with the commission of infraction of law'.27 The function of the Commission was to determine facts relating to 'matters of public importance and by adopting a procedure, which is not adversarial in character, but inquisitorial in character'.28 It was primarily a fact- finding commission which was authorized to assess the impact of the privatization of governance on public life. The report is revealing, and it would not be an exaggeration to suggest that a study of the history and politics of the Emergency will remain elusive if the report is ignored. The purpose here is to build the story on the basis of the findings of the report, which unfortunately have not received, so far, adequate scholarly attention.

 What led to the Emergency needs to be understood first. Since the aim here is not to provide a detailed account of the Emergency, I shall refer to two major events which reportedly created the conditions in which the Emergency was declared on 25 June 1975.29 One can pin down two tumultuous events that largely accounted for the imposition of the constitutional decree for the suspension of the democratic constitutional machinery that had taken root in India since her political freedom in 1947. Scholars point out that the events on 12 and 13 June seemed to have decisively tilted the political balance in favour of a declaration of Emergency. On 12 June, Indira Gandhi's election to parliament from Rae Bareilly was declared null and void because of proven indulgence in 'corrupt electoral practices on two counts, namely using her private secretary in her election campaign and employing state and local government officials to manage her campaign for winning the parliamentary seat from Rae Bareilly'. Her election was invalid, although she later got a little respite from the Supreme Court of India, which, instead of granting complete and absolute stay of the earlier judgment, granted conditional stay by enabling her to remain as Prime Minister without the privileges that a member of Lok Sabha, the lower chamber of the Indian parliament, enjoys.

 The second event was the result of the Gujarat assembly election which her party, the Congress, lost miserably to a motley conglomeration of parties, known as the Janata Front. It was simply unthinkable to the Prime Minister, given her declared confidence of winning the state election, since it was she who had campaigned vigorously to garner votes. These two events were powerful testimonies to her dwindling popularity. The situation became worse for her when the united

opposition mounted a scathing attack on her, which became virulent as soon as the media got involved in this campaign. She was determined to improve her political image by measures to gag the opposition, regardless of the obvious ideological consequences. On 25 June, a massive meeting of the opposition parties was organized in Delhi, which was addressed by Jayaprakash Narayan, also known as J P to the people. As he had done in the past, possibly in a less direct way, J P appealed to the military, the police, and the civil service to put loyalty to the Constitution above loyalty to the government. This gave a handle to the Prime Minister, who construed it as an attempt 'to incite our armed forces to mutiny and police to rebel'. It was clearly stated in her radio broadcast on 26 June, when she justified the imposition of the Emergency to scuttle an armed rebellion that the opposition parties were planning to organize in India. She thus presented her case by saying that

The President has proclaimed an Emergency. This is nothing to panic about. I am sure [that] you are conscious of the deep and widespread conspiracy which has been brewing ever since I began to introduce certain progressive measure of benefit to the common man and woman of India. In the name of democracy, it has been sought to negate the very functioning of democracy. . . . How can any government worth the name stand by and allow the country's stability to be imperiled?30

To avoid further deterioration, as Indira Gandhi had put it, the constitutional Emergency was imposed which led to the suspension of the democratic functioning of the state. Ordinary citizens realized with shock, as a commentator has most perceptibly commented recently, that 'they had no rights whatsoever under the new system'.31 A democratic governance was soon replaced by an authoritarian system of administration because 'politicians surrounding [Indira Gandhi, the Prime Minister] became small dictators [and] . . . the new style of exercising control was copied all the way to the municipal level'.32 The system was subverted to champion one's whims and it was done so easily, which confirms how vulnerable the democratic system was in India; the well- nurtured institutions that held democracy so high lost their vitality and became stooges of the ruling authority in their grand plan to make India part of its fiefdom.

 The arguments defending constitutional propriety were forcibly muted in circumstances when even the figment of opposition was considered a serious threat to Indian polity. Governance became leader- centric, even though that was contrary to the fundamental precepts of Indian democracy. In order to sustain and consolidate its hegemonic political control, those in power undertook three measures that aimed at the personalizing of public authority: (a) widespread arrest and illegal detention of many political activists for their alleged involvement in anti- state activities, (b) the stringent control of the press by pursuing press censorship; and (c) adoption of retroactive amendments and the use of law and the Constitution to endorse the draconian measures that the ruling clique had indulged in. Justifying these steps as necessary to retain India's democratic

fabric, the state never wavered while arresting or detaining even those individuals who never took part in anti- government agitation but were implicated with the charge that they harboured ill feelings towards the state. The press was not allowed to function, because it was a threat to those involved in privatizing governance for partisan ends. Journalists were indiscriminately incarcerated. The government kept amending a draconian law, the *Maintenance of Internal Security Act*, to allow the custodians of law and order enormous power to execute what the top administrative authority willed. Parliament became a stooge at the hands of the Prime Minister and others, including her son Sanjay Gandhi, who did not even hold a constitutional position. In an environment of personalized governance, India clearly lost her democracy and also the principles of constitutional propriety, which were never challenged so strongly in the past. As shown in the literature, it was not merely a dark period in India's recent political history; it also showed how values of ethics in governance became a casualty, since those in power had hardly had any respect for them.

## **Analysis of the consequences of the Emergency**

The Emergency was proclaimed in response to pressing circumstances, as Indira Gandhi stated to defend her action. Critical of such an interpretation, the Shah Commission charged her with violating constitutional propriety, even while she was preparing the ground for the declaration on 26 June 1975. In this act, her confidante was her cabinet colleague S S Ray, who admitted before the Commission that, when he met her, she seemed to have already chosen the course of action to contain the opposition campaign against her administration. As Ray pointed out,

she told me on two or three occasions [in the immediate past] that in view of the all- round indiscipline and lawlessness . . . India required a shock treatment and something had to be done . . . and some sort of emergency power or drastic power was necessary.33

On the basis of the reports that Indira Gandhi had received, she firmly believed that India was drifting 'towards chaos and anarchy'.34 Ray was reportedly reluctant to go for an emergency declaration because he, as the Commission's Report underlines, told her that 'they could manage [the opposition challenges] with the laws which are already on the statute books' which he defended by mentioning 'the success with which they tackled the law and order problem of West Bengal within the framework of the laws then in force'.35 Indira Gandhi did not seem persuaded; she wanted strong measures. When pressed further by the Prime Minister, Ray suggested that she could consider, if she so desired, Article 352 of the Constitution for the purpose of imposing an internal Emergency. This was accepted by her and adequate steps were soon undertaken to execute the constitutional provision for the Emergency.

 There were two types of impropriety that Indira Gandhi had committed to justify her whimsical decisions. She seemed to have made up her mind when she

had had a discussion with her cabinet colleague, S S Ray. Notwithstanding Ray's faith in the prevalent law and order machinery, he could not oppose what the Prime Minister had suggested. As he himself admitted before the Commission, 'there were certain things, which, when they came from the Prime Minister, he could not say that they were totally wrong'.36 This is reflective of how vulnerable her cabinet colleague was, who was perhaps too scared to say what he felt otherwise; by personal authority, she managed to run the state with the aid of a cabinet which hardly had an independent voice, and virtually became a collection of people parroting the leader's views. The second serious impropriety consists of her efforts to simply bypass the cabinet by seeking presidential approval for the proclamation. In her note of 25 June to the President of India, she herself mentioned that, although she would have liked to have consulted her cabinet colleagues on this matter, it was not possible due to pressing circumstances. Taking serious note of this omission, the Commission strongly felt that it was another illustration of whimsical decisions that were the natural outcome when authority was personalized. People tended to violate the basic values of ethics in governance because of their arrogance in circumstances in which their authority was hardly questioned. The Commission thus unambiguously stated that

it is clear that some of the important functionaries in the Home Ministry, Cabinet Secretariat and the Prime Minister's Secretariat, who should have been consulted before such an important decision was taken, did not know anything about the proclamation of Emergency till very late and some of them learnt about it only on the morning of June 26, 1975.37

The Emergency was thus declared in contravention of the fundamental ethos of collective responsibility that was the core of the Westminster form of parliamentary democracy. Instead of regret, Indira Gandhi strongly defended her decision by saying that, if the Emergency had not been put in place, a duly- elected government would have been 'pulled down by threats of violence and demonstrations in the streets and by inciting the army and police to revolt'.38 For her, it was perhaps the only plausible solution to avoid the colossal devastation likely to happen if preventive measures had not been undertaken in advance. This was the shock treatment that she conceived of to perpetuate the personalized rule, the Commission lamented. Besides violating the fundamental tenets of constitutional propriety that the cabinet form of government entails, there is another serious constitutional lapse that confirms how parliamentary procedures were bypassed. The Commission had in fact found out that the 1975 declaration of Emergency was redundant because the Emergency that was proclaimed in 1971 during the war with Pakistan which finally culminated in the rise of Bangladesh as an independent nation was never withdrawn; the Defence of India rules were in operation; the provisions of Article 358, which included the suspension of the right to freedom (Article 19 of the Constitution), were also operational. The Constitution, according to the Commission, 'does not contemplate the issue of an Emergency upon an Emergency already existing, nor prevents the courts from entertaining any challenge to the declaration of this additional Emergency'.39 The decision cannot be declared illegal as the Constitution is silent, although it reveals that Indira Gandhi's declared objective of inflicting 'a shock treatment' to those indulged in 'anti- government activities' must have persuaded her to undertake such a feat which, as one's common sense suggests, was not required when an Emergency was already there. So the proclamation of Emergency was not a knee- jerk reaction, but one that was based on serious thinking, which was supportive of her design for personal authority at the cost of the fundamental values of parliamentary democracy and collective responsibility of the Westminster form of authority. It was possible for her to bypass the constitutional checks and balances, because the institutions holding India's democratic structure of governance were too weak to contain authoritarian tendencies and also because of the fact that those associated with Indira Gandhi did not find it prudent to challenge her decisions. Nothing was thus reason driven; everything was governed by power, which created a different kind of politics, in which values became less significant and hardcore pragmatism seemed to have ruled the roost. A new era had thus been ushered in in which an individual, if endowed with extraordinary personality, could easily be authoritarian within the constitutional boundary of the 1950 Constitution of India, as Indira Gandhi had shown during the two- year period of Emergency.

 Along with the tuning of the constitutional provisions to support the Emergency, the political authority guided by Indira Gandhi devised elaborate plans to control the media which had been held responsible for the chaos preceding the 25 June proclamation by alerting citizens to the government's plans, which the Congress leadership had undertaken to further personalize power at the cost of basic democratic rights. Indira Gandhi contrived the plans to create a reign of terror against the journalists and media houses that did not appear to be progovernment. She believed, as the Commission noted, that 'the agitation was only in the newspapers and once the newspapers were placed under censorship there was no agitation'.40 The concerned minister was thus instructed to make laws 'to prevent scurrilous, malicious and mischievous writings in the newspapers'.41 This was all- out war against the deviant newspapers that were involved in exposing the authoritarian government's designs that fulfilled the leader's whims. The reasons for the administrative measures taken against the media in general and the Press in particular was, as the Commission noted, 'to keep the public in ignorance and instil fear in them thereby suppressing dissent in every form, individual, political, parliamentary and judicial, and that it was used as an instrument of news management aimed at thought control'.42 The journalists who were harassed during this period testified to the atmosphere of fear that surrounded everyone in the profession.

 It was believed that the media needed to be controlled to avoid further trouble. The government left no stone unturned to make it happen. As the Commission highlighted, there were three ways in which the political authority executed its plan, which were: (a) censorship, (b) pressure tactics, and (c) creation of an agency – *Samachar* – to exert better administrative control over the dissemination

of news. It was obvious that stringent guidelines were formulated to impose rigid censorship: the media, both print and visual, was not allowed to circulate items which were not supportive of government activities; later, it was decided, as the Commission confirmed, that the media was forbidden to carry any news items other than those which had, according to the Ministry of Information, publicity value for the government. The media was also pressurized to toe the government line of thinking through discriminatory policies in the booking of advertisements, which was likely to affect the financial health of the media houses. For this, the government prepared strict guidelines for the Directorate of Advertisement and Visual Publicity, the sole public agency responsible for fixing the amount of money to be given for advertisements. It was decided, as a preemptive measure, that 'newspapers which indulged in virulent propaganda, inciting communal passion or offending socially accepted conventions of decency or morality were not to be used for advertisement'.43 Accordingly a list was prepared which showed that the Information Ministry had segregated those newspapers which had shown an inclination towards the political parties opposed to the Congress. The grading of newspapers in terms of being 'friendly, neutral and hostile' was based on ideological inclination and also proprietorial affiliations to political parties.44 A scan of the amount of advertisement support that was given to take care of the publication costs of political parties other than the Congress party reveals that the policy was clearly discriminatory. The Commission thus noted that

the Government during this period utilized its advertising policy as a source of financial assistance or denial of financial assistance to newspapers and journals, among others, in complete variance with the policy, approved by the parliament; . . . there were glaring examples to show that newspapers that supported the government policy . . . were given advertisement beyond their legitimate due.45

 Similar was the formation of *Samachar* out of the merger of four news agencies, United News of India, Press Trust of India, Hindustan *Samachar* and *Samachar* Bharati. The purpose was to exert centralized control over these news agencies. Bringing them together would give the government a free hand in controlling news dissemination. As is evident, the motive behind this merger was not to attain administrative efficiency, but to streamline control over the news agency, which could then easily be prevented from being errant. It is also clear that the Emergency had created an environment in which the political authority hardly showed any concern for the values of democratic governance. What primarily motivated those in authority was individual desire for personal power, perhaps for self- gratification. How did individuals become so powerful? The reasons can be located in the weakness of the institutions of democracy, which hardly acted as a deterrent when efforts were made to manipulate their functioning in accordance with a personal agenda. It was easier for Indira Gandhi, in other words, to undertake such a feat, because whatever she did apparently had the support of the parliament; she put all the decisions before parliament for ratification and, given her hegemonic role in the Congress Party and also in parliament, none of her colleagues in the party or government ever dissented to what she had decided. This was democracy in its perverted form because a democratically elected leader virtually became authoritarian in a context in which democratic checks and balances were severely compromised. A regime of constitutional authoritarianism had emerged which gradually lost its appeal, because of its failure to appreciate the values of ethics in governance, which then became significantly compromised.

 The Emergency was, as the Commission concluded, an aberration. Administration became a captive of those holding power and those at the periphery remained deprived of even what was legitimately due to them. The system, the Commission further laments, was subverted to enable the powerful to exercise authority in accordance primarily with personal whim. It was a tragic scenario, in which government machinery was appropriated to advance causes that were usually justified as necessary to sustain the system and to prevent it from being totally derailed by opposition- sponsored anti- state activities. While commenting on the excesses during the Emergency, the Commission forcefully argued that 'with the press gagged and a resultant blackout of authentic information, arbitrary arrests and detention went on apace. Effective dissent was smothered, followed by a general erosion of democratic values. Highhanded and arbitrary actions were carried out with impunity'.46 This is perhaps the most clearly speltout account of how the Emergency functioned to subvert the democratic processes of governance, which caught the nation by surprise. Public authority ceased to be public since the civil service remained neither civil nor service driven, but became a stooge of those holding political authority. The system seemed to have been completely derailed because, as the Commission underlined,

tyrants sprouted at all levels overnight – tyrants whose claim to authority was largely based on their proximity to the seats of power. The attitude of the general run of public functionaries was largely characterized by a paralysis of the will to do the right and proper thing. . . . The fear generated by the mere threat and without even the actual use of the weapon of detention under MISA [Maintenance of Internal Security Act] became so pervasive that the general run of public servants acted as willing tools of tyranny.47

 The execution of the Emergency- related measures was so sudden that the Commission felt that they were seen to be insurmountable long before public functionaries realized their implications. To this was added the fear that seemed to have gripped those involved in running the administration at the lower levels. The inevitable consequence was a massive decline of ethics inherent in their behaviour which was in many cases, the Commission noted, 'beyond the mental grasp of many of the public functionaries'.48 In the Commission's perception, the impact of the Emergency was devastating because, besides the unconditional

surrender of public servants to the political leadership of the Congress, the government machinery was allowed to be appropriated by Indira Gandhi's son Sanjay Gandhi, who held no constitutional position. While commenting on the massive demolition that the Delhi administration had carried out to fulfil its 'beautification of Delhi plan', the Commission attributed the decision 'to pander[ing] to the whims of Sanjay Gandhi who was not answerable to anybody and who held no position whatever in the administrative scheme'.49 This was illustrative of how institutions of governance got derailed once authority was encouraged to be personalized. Various examples can be cited to show how the Emergency created an environment in which the values of democratic governance were severely jolted and the voice for their retention was too feeble to receive serious attention. Given its varied implications and manifestations, the Emergency can be said to be multidimensional in character, which confirms the argument that the two years of derailment of the value- based administration was both an offshoot and a product of the decline of ethics in governance, which had clear social roots. Despite obvious disheartening implications for citizens' individual and collective lives, the Emergency is thus a creative experience in the sense that it enables us to understand the decline of ethics as integral to the cultural deficit confronting India in the context of the state- centric governance of the previous era.

 The report of the Shah Commission stands out not only because it is an analytical statement of what had happened during the Emergency, but also because it looked into the possible factors which justified the arbitrariness and recklessness in governance. In the words of the Commission,

arbitrariness and reckless disregard of the rights of others and the consequent misery which characterized a number of actions of the different public servants over a period of nearly 19 months, terrorized the citizens resulting in a complete loss of the faith of the people in the fairness and objectivity of the Administration generally.50

The Administration, by becoming a stooge of the politicians and those officers who aligned with them, lost its character of being an instrument for public wellbeing. Whether it was inevitable or made to happen is a debatable issue, as the Commission underlined the difficulty of what the officers had undergone once they were instructed to do certain things by saying that

some of the officers did apparently a series of wrong things, being powerless to resist the pressures in the prevailing conditions and being afraid of the consequences, if they were not to do what the politicians or higher authorities expected or ordered them to do.51

 Given the fact that the public servants were complicit in the desire of the personalizing authority, there had emerged a situation in which the basic administrative values of integrity and care for public well- being seemed to have lost

their viability. Politicians and their collaborators hijacked the administration to pursue and consolidate tendencies towards undermining what constituted the fundamental ethos of democratic governance. This was an unwarranted intervention, which should not have been allowed to prosper to guarantee the legitimate functioning of public administration in its true spirit. How to create such an atmosphere, in which the public authority remains tuned to the public interests, is another important issue that the Commission looked into. It is true that 'there was an all- pervading fear of consequences among the officials which . . . inhibited many of [them] from acting in the only way which would have been conducive to the health of the administration primarily and of the nation generally'.52 On the basis of an analysis of considerable evidence, the Commission had suggested that the most effective antidote to a degenerating civil service was to create an environment in which tendencies to overshadow integrity and ethics in governance were not allowed to take root. Political leadership had a significant contribution to make, given their critical role as opinion makers at the grassroots. So had the officials, who were trained to translate the political values that politicians upheld in their interactions with the people at large. So, a good administration was elusive unless these components of governance were dialectically interconnected. The Commission thus strongly felt that

it is [therefore] imperative to ensure that the officials at the decision- making levels are protected and immunized from threats and pressures so that they can function in the manner in which they govern with one single consideration – the promotion of public well- being and the upholding of the fundamentals of the Constitution and the rule of law.53

What is emphasized here is the importance of institutional watchfulness in sustaining the core of governance. This is a fair argument that needs to be understood in the wider socio- political context, because values are created and sustained provided there exists a supportive environment. So the fact that tendencies towards personalizing authority at the cost of the governed have social roots is critically important in conceptualizing administrative decadence. India is no exception. The Emergency was the epitome of the administrative distortions that India had encountered during those tumultuous 19 months. By probing thoroughly into what led to these distortions, not only has the Shah Commission provided sufficient inputs to comprehend the phenomenon, it has also given insights on how to tackle it before it becomes unmanageable.

 The Emergency was a wake- up call for the citizens because it alerted them to the adverse consequences of the personalization of administration at the cost of the core principles of democratic governance being nurtured in an independent India. Democracy is 'an ethic' and not 'just a machine', and the core of democratic politics is to create the conditions for individuals in a society to develop to their fullest potentials.54 Although the core loses salience on occasions, history has shown that it is revived by the people, once they understand the importance of democratic principles as perhaps the best shield for protecting individual

rights against the ruling authority's hegemonic design. The emergency was an occasion in which individual rights were taken away, which perhaps contributed significantly to the attempts to get them back through sustained politicoideological movements. Thus a commentator metaphorically suggested that although 'the fragile balance between reason and power was jolted during the Emergency, [the fact is that] ultimately reason returned'55 due to the campaign drawing on the public's concern for democracy and prejudice- free governance. The Emergency is also about a human existence appreciative of contrasting tendencies. It had shown 'how easily [Indians] could accept the loss of their freedoms and how obediently [they] agreed to being herded into submission'.56 The very fact that the desire for freedom ultimately prevailed also demonstrates that 'the comfort with submission and the desire to live with freedom seem to exist side by side; . . . democracy [thus] lives in the space between capitulation and resistance, and the Emergency offered [Indians] an opportunity to experience both'.57 The Emergency was a peculiar experience that Indians had undergone following the 25 June proclamation. It prepared India for democracy, which, unless properly nurtured, loses its vitality, as the Emergency had shown. The real legacy of the Emergency has thus been wholly unintended because, as argued by an analyst,

it has made India conscious, as never before, of civil liberties, of the right to freedom of expression; the Emergency, by robbing India for a while of the soul of republicanism, has made it a truer Republic than it was before 1975 when the Emergency was put into effect.58

It was thus a defining moment not only for citizens who, by confronting a systemic attack on their rights, learnt that rights needed to be protected but also for the nation which was likely to be subservient to the political authority if it lost its vitality.

 What accounts for the complete collapse of democratic governance in India during the Emergency was not a systemic failure, but the capacity of the ruling authority to utilize the prevalent constitutional arrangement to its advantage. This is an important lesson of the Emergency, for what had happened in the wake of the June proclamation was endorsed by the 1950 Constitution of India. Emergency was not, at all, an extra- constitutional design, but one that was justified by the provisions of the Constitution. It has thus been aptly characterized as a regime of constitutional authoritarianism. Being armed with a constitutional guarantee, those who had ideologically sponsored the Emergency utilized the legally backed available rules to fulfil their partisan goals. It is argued that the horrors of mass detention during the Emergency were indeed 'built into the preventive detention legislation initiated by [India's first Prime Minister], Jawaharlal Nehru'.59 Underplaying this aspect of governance, the Shah Commission attributed the Emergency to the abuse of the system by an individual and the coterie around her. This is surely making 'a monster of Indira Gandhi',60 an easy escape from objectively assessing the Emergency as a systemic failure to build the institutional pillars capable of defending democratic governance in adverse circumstances. So it is possible to argue that what happened was not the subversion of a system of administration, 'but its apotheosis'61 and that what the Commission characterized as misuse and abuse which sprang directly 'from the very provisions and rules and traditions built into that system'.62 This is a conundrum that cannot be resolved easily, because it is surprising that democratic governance was made to disappear during the Emergency by the same Constitution that protected and nurtured its well- being. What it suggests is perhaps the fact that the constitutional guarantee, by itself, can never be an adequate safeguard unless the institutions are strong enough to stand by the constitution, which is not merely a codified version of the rule of law, but also upholds its spirit. The Emergency was undoubtedly a constitutional design, but it was clearly an aberration in the processes of governance, challenging the very foundational values informing the Constitution of India. An analytical scan of the period thus reveals how constitutional values lost their viability for constitutional reasons, and how the consolidation of an authoritarian regime was justified as the best shield against the opposition- engineered efforts to undermine those very constitutional values.

## **Concluding observations**

In independent India, the 1964 Santhanam Committee Report and 1977 Shah Commission findings reveal that the root of administrative decay was unrestricted discretion, exercised by individuals usually in connivance with the political authority. For the Santhanam Committee, the vicious atmosphere that had emerged in the wake of the Licence–Quota–Permit Raj was perpetuated because of the benefits that both politicians and civil servants accrued from the system. There were hardly any organized movements against the abuse of authority, since the issue of administrative corruption did not seem to have caused alarm to the public. So, the situation was propitious for corruption to grow, but was not conducive to provoke anti- corruption campaigns. Driven by internal concern for a corruption- free governance in India as a necessity for the young nation to develop as per the exalted nationalist aspirations, the Santhanam Committee was thus a milestone in India's efforts towards creating adequately strong internal mechanisms to effectively combat corruption or malpractices in governance. By referring to the importance of a social climate supportive of corruption- free governance, the Committee was also aware that the institutional mechanisms, however effective they were, remained simply ornamental unless there was adequate social backing.

 Unlike the Santhanam Committee, the 1977 Shah Commission had a very limited mandate to look into the excesses that made public authority a personal fiefdom of the Congress leaders who conveniently bypassed the well- established rule, regulations and conventions to fulfil their personal mission. By proclaiming an Emergency as per the Constitution of India, the elected political authority had constitutional backing to sustain an authoritarian rule. Within a span of two years, the administration was substantially re- oriented to strike down the edifice

of democratic governance that India had developed over the years. The report was a timely warning that gave us enough inputs to understand that lack of public watchfulness was responsible for the creation and perhaps the consolidation of a Frankenstein's monster regime, because individuals holding public authority tended to become authoritarian if they were not sufficiently democratic in spirit and commitment.

 An analytical scan of these two reports confirms that social context cannot be neglected while seeking to comprehend administrative decay and derailment in India. The internal Emergency of two years (1975–7) was a specific instance in which public governance was made a captive of the ruling party, especially its top leaders, though that was possible because the idea of discretionary power that those in authority held, especially in the context of the Licence- Quota-Permit Raj, continued to remain effective. The concern that the Santhanam Committee had expressed in the early 1960s was reiterated in the mid 1970s by the Shah Commission, which confirms that they had the same conceptual inclination while identifying the discretionary exercise of authority as a significant determinant of administrative decadence in India.

#### **PART B**

## **The Second Administrative Reforms Commission (or the Moily Commission) and Ethics Committees: delineating a design for ethics in governance**

This part consists of two complementary sections which will be discussed in the following pages: on the one hand, it offers a critical analysis of the design that the Second Administrative Reforms Commission (also known as the Moily Commission) provides to ascertain the importance of ethics in governance; on the other hand, it also considers how the *Rajya Sabha* and *Lok Sabha* Ethics Committees handled the decline of ethics in public life. In an India that is tilted in favour of neo- liberal ideology, these endeavours represent serious efforts on the part of those involved in governance to create and consolidate institutions capable of arresting the decline of ethics. It is true that institutional designs, however strong they are on paper, will be futile unless they have organic roots in society. Nonetheless, these are useful inputs to comprehend how issues of ethics and corruption are being dealt with by those holding substantial authority in governance.

 Based on the need to reform the administration, the second Administrative Reform Commission was set up by the Government of India in 2005, under the chairmanship of Veerappa Moily, to look into the issues crippling public administration in India. The Commission attributes the visible decline of ethics to a whole range of factors, including the socio- psychological decline of the individuals responsible for the redrawing of India's path for development. In the light of a general decline in public administration, the Commission thus observed that 'in our case, at times public office is perceived to be an extension of one's property. That is why sometimes, public offices are a source of huge corruption and a means of extending patronage'.63 The Commission was thus asked to suggest measures to achieve a 'proactive, responsive, accountable, sustainable and efficient administration for the country at all levels of the government'. The Commission presented 15 reports to the government for consideration. Among them, the report on *Ethics in Governance* should be of particular interest to all those who clamour for an ethical framework for politics in the country. The Commission, while taking cognizance of the salutary measures introduced in recent years at the prompting of the Supreme Court and a pro- active Election Commission, has made a host of recommendations to usher in stability and accountability in the field of politics.

 For the Commission, 'ethics is a set of standards that society places on itself and which helps guide behaviour, choices and actions'.64 In order to arrest the decline of ethics in governance, the Commission adopts two principles. On the one hand, it has been emphasized that values and good moral character are important keys to meaningfully combat tendencies to support malpractices in administration. On the other hand, there should also be exemplary punishment for those involved in corruption; only then can the menace of corruption, the Commission feels, be effectively tackled. With these preliminary remarks, the Commission lays out the historical context of what led to the massive decline of ethics in public life. According to the Commission, there are three factors which seem to have aggravated the situation: first, the obvious pernicious legacy of colonialism supportive of 'unchallenged authority and the propensity to exercise power arbitrarily'65 created a context in which those holding public authority became shackle- less and deviated from ethical conduct. Second, the enormous asymmetry of power also accounted for the excessive importance of public servants especially in India's state- led and bureaucracy- centric governance. As poverty was so rampant, government support was always most sought after; by being an authority disbursing favours in the form of assistance, public servants created an aura at least to those seeking for government help that allowed them to bypass the basic code of conduct. Third, by creating a state- centric governance, Indian policy makers upheld the view that the state cannot do anything wrong, which was responsible for making Indian bureaucracy all the more powerful as perhaps the only effective instrument to articulate the best of the state's intentions. These three factors, stated the Commission, created an environment in which the idea of ethics never took root. As the environment was propitious, corruption grew disproportionately in India. Critical of discretion and monopoly in exercising public authority, the Moily Commission also made a scathing attack on over- centralization because 'the more remotely power is exercised from the people, the greater is the distance between authority and accountability'.66 In the erstwhile system of state- centric governance, local governments were never allowed to take root and power was concentrated both horizontally and vertically in a few hands. The net result of this was, the Commission laments, 'weakened citizenry and mounting corruption'.67 As the description

suggests, the decline of ethics in governance in the previous era was attributed to the exclusive control that Indian bureaucracy had exercised at the cost of stakeholders in a polity which considered the state- led development paradigm as perhaps the only meaningful design for inclusive development. So, corruption in public life was a history- driven phenomenon, which raised its ugly head since the environment was conducive to that.

## **How to arrest derailment in governance?**

Values are the soul of public governance. The study and practice of governance can never be just technical or managerial. Governance has to be ethics- conscious since it entails effort towards ensuring public well- being. According to the Commission, so long as public servants are not accountable, the steps towards creating an ethics- driven administration will never be effective. What is thus required most is the empowerment of citizens in order to hold those in authority accountable and make them sensitive to their duties and responsibilities. Empowerment of citizens is easier said than done. Hence the Commission referred to certain powerful instruments which are useful in making citizens integral to governance: the right to information, effective citizens' charters, opportunity and incentives to promote the proactive approach of citizens, stakeholders' involvement in the delivery of public services, public consultation in decision making and social auditing are some of these devices of accountability that not only catapult the citizen to the centre stage of governance, but also promote integrity and prejudice- free decision making. What is striking here is the fact that, unlike the Weberian notion of accountability, which seeks to bring about a compatibility of interests between top- down policy and bottom- line implementation, the Commission insists on instruments that are driven by external agencies. Hierarchical governance is detrimental to public participation in decision making since hierarchy 'creates more ethical problems than it solves, by fostering inequality, an inappropriate level of instrumentalism on the basis of technical rationality, and agency inattention to the needs of the community'.68 Hence the argument for participatory governance gains far more credibility by insisting on creating a situation 'for encouraging participation of the citizenry in the process of planning and providing public goods and services'.69 Known as designs for external accountability, these instruments involve citizens as governance is articulated and executed. With their integral role in rule setting and execution, citizens have become, in the new dispensation, critical towards public authority. It has thus been argued that 'by involving citizens in monitoring government performance, demanding and enhancing transparency and exposing government failures and misdeeds, . . . [these] accountability mechanisms are potentially powerful tools against . . . corruption tendencies derailing governance'.70 This is the core of social accountability that relies on 'civic engagement, i.e. in which it is ordinary citizens and/or civil society organizations who participate directly or indirectly in exacting accountability'.71 Complementary to the internal mechanisms of accountability, social accountability mechanisms

allow ordinary citizens to access information, voice their needs and demand accountability between elections . . . [and also] enhance the ability of citizens to move beyond mere protest toward engaging with bureaucrats and politicians in a more informed, organized, constructive and systematic manner, thus increasing the chances of effecting positive change.72

These ideas were reflected in what the Commission felt while devising mechanisms for arresting the debasement of governance in India. As the administrative and ideological steps that the Commission had proposed to revamp Indian administration show, serious attempts were made to re- conceptualize governance in the globalizing world in which governance is no longer a captive of bureaucracy but is also drawn from what citizens feel is most appropriate for their wellbeing.

 The report begins with the ethical values in politics. It says that politics, and those engaged in it, play a vital role in the legislative and executive wings of the State whose acts of commission and omission in working on the basis of the Constitution and the rule of law become the point of intervention for the judiciary. Being aware that 'it is unrealistic and simplistic to expect perfection in politics in an ethically imperfect environment; there is [however] no denying the fact that the standards set in politics profoundly influence those in other aspects of governance'.73 Impressed by the so- called Nolan principles,74 which the 1994 Nolan Committee on Standards in Public Life in the United Kingdom identified as necessary for governance, the Commission refers to these principles as perhaps foundational ideas in any thinking on ethics in governance. The principles are as follows:

- *Selflessness*: holders of public office take decisions solely in terms of public interest. They should not do so in order to gain financial or other material benefits for themselves, their family or their friends.
- *Integrity*: holders of public office should not place themselves under any financial or other obligation to outside individuals or organizations that might influence them in the performance of their official duties.
- *Objectivity*: in carrying out public business, including making public appointments, awarding contracts or recommending individuals for rewards or benefits, holders of public office should make choices on merit.
- *Accountability*: holders of public office are accountable for their decisions and actions to the public and must submit themselves to whatever scrutiny is appropriate to their office.
- *Openness*: holders of public office should be as open as possible about all the decisions and actions they take. They should give reasons for their decisions and restrict information only when the wider public interest clearly demands.
- *Honesty*: holder of public office have a duty to declare any private interests relating to their public duties and to take steps to resolve any conflicts arising in a way that protects the public interest.

• *Leadership*: holders of public office should promote and support these principles by leadership and example.

 Following the Nolan principles, the Commission thus stipulates the following steps75 to ensure ethical behaviour in public life:

- 1 Codifying ethical norms and practices;
- 2 Disclosing personal interest to avoid conflict between public interests and personal gain;
- 3 Creating a mechanism for enforcing the relevant rules; and
- 4 Providing norms for qualifying and disqualifying a public functionary from office.

On the basis of the above directions, the Commission felt that there should be a Code of Ethics for the public office holder or ministers who are meant to serve the public, since they owe their position to them, in addition to the Code of Conduct, which also ascertains their accountability. The Code of Ethics should be based on the Nolan principles suggesting, 'the overarching duty of Ministers to comply with the law, to uphold the administration of justice and to protect the integrity of public life'.76 Appreciative of the ideas implicit in the Nolan principles, the Commission provides a long checklist of the activities while articulating the Code of Conduct77 that the ministers are expected to uphold or avoid, which is as follows:

- Ministers must uphold the highest ethical standards;
- Ministers must uphold the principle of collective responsibility;
- Ministers should have a duty to account to Parliament, and be held to account, for the policies, decisions and actions of their department and agencies;
- Ministers must ensure that no conflict arises, or appears to arise, between their public duties and their private interests;
- Ministers in the Lok Sabha must keep separate their roles as Ministers and as constituency member;
- Ministers must not use government resources for party or political purposes; they must accept responsibility for decision taken by them and not merely blame it on wrong advice;
- Ministers must uphold the political impartiality of the civil service and not ask civil servants to act in any way, which would conflict with their duties and responsibilities;
- Ministers must comply with the requirements that the two Houses of Parliament lay down from time to time;
- Ministers must recognize that misuse of official position or information is violation of the trust reposed in them as public functionaries;
- Ministers must ensure that public money is used with utmost economy and care;

- Minsters must function in such a manner as to serve as instruments of good governance and to provide services for the betterment of the public at large and foster socio- economic development; and
- Ministers must act objectively, impartially, honestly, equitably, diligently and in a fair and just manner.

 A checklist notwithstanding, the Code of Ethics also represents efforts to create an environment in which public functionaries are made to abide by certain basic rules while discharging their roles. These are not new ideas, but what is distinctive about them is the force with which they were articulated; they can be said to be state- sponsored ideas, which were upheld to redesign governance by establishing a specific Code of Ethics for those involved in governance. Nonetheless, not only are these steps well directed, they are also context driven since the decadence in governance in India was the result of the abdication of ethics by those holding public office. In that respect, the Commission has set in motion processes whereby the Code of Ethics became integral to the Code of Conduct, especially for the ministers who are primarily public servants in a democratic form of governance. It is true that 'the enunciation of ethical values and code of conduct puts moral pressure on public functionaries'.78 They require effective monitoring and need to be backed by an enforcement agency within the legislature; otherwise, they lose their meaning, especially between elections when the voters have an opportunity to punish the deviant legislators.

 The other serious recommendation relates to Article 311 of the Constitution of India that accords a special constitutional guarantee to those in the civil service; even if they are implicated by charges of corruption, they cannot be dismissed by an authority subordinate to that by which they were appointed. This is a continuation of the past position, as the guarantee was introduced by the *Government of India Act* of 1919. The immunity granted to civil servants in case they are charged with serious offences seems to have been utilized to placate them. The 1964 Santhanam Committee expressed concern over this undue protection for civil servants, which, the Committee felt, was a source of corruption.79 Persuaded by the fact that corrupt officials need to be weeded out to generate public faith in public authority, the Commission was reluctant to extend the favour to the civil servants. In a democratic system where power emanates from the ballot box, an extraordinary protection for the civil service amounts to contributing to a prejudiced system of governance. The Commission thus believes that

the rights of a civil servant under the Constitution should be subordinate to the overall requirement of public interests and contractual rights of the State. It cannot be an argument that a corrupt civil servant's rights are more important than the need to ensure an honest, efficient and corruption- free administration. Ultimately, the public servant, an agent of the State, cannot be superior to the State and it is his fundamental duty to serve the State with integrity, devotion, honesty, impartiality, objectivity, transparency and accountability.80

 Article 311 thus leaves enough scope for it to be misused. The founding fathers did not confront the situation that has emerged now when the constitutional guarantee is being misconstrued as an instrument to consolidate one's fiefdom in governance. In the words of the Commission, there exists

a fairly common perception that explicit articulation of protection in the Constitution itself gives an impression of inordinate protection [which led the Commission to suggest that] 'on balance, Article 311 need not continue to be a part of the Constitution.81

In order to withdraw this undue protection to the civil service, the Commission made the unequivocal recommendation of 'the repeal of Article 311' and enactment of appropriate legislation to provide protection to public servants against arbitrary action, which is guaranteed by Article 309. This is a very useful recommendation with a far- reaching impact on public governance. Bureaucracy has, by instinct, an urge for unwarranted power and it happens so often, especially when the politicians lack the required technical ability to translate into action their ideological commitments to the stakeholders. By way of helping them, the bureaucrats become policy makers and tend to bend or distort rules to please their political bosses; this becomes a habit that is inculcated due to circumstantial needs. In view of their constitutional protection (à la Article 311) and India's cumbersome judicial processes, civil servants in India seem to have been encouraged to resort to malpractices to manipulate the well- established rules and regulations. The honest members of the civil services remain marginalized, while their colleagues, because of their complicity with the political masters, hog the limelight. In such a gloomy scenario, the de- constitutionalizing of Article 311 will have serious implications in the drive towards creating and consolidating an ethics- driven public governance.

## **Election- related expenses: a source of corruption**

According to the Commission,

excesses in elections (in campaign- funding, use of illegitimate money, quantum of expenditure, imperfect electoral rolls, impersonation, boothcapturing, violence, inducements and intimidation), floor- crossing after elections to get into power and abuse of power in public office became major afflictions of the political process over the years.82

What seems to have aggravated the situation is large, illegal and illegitimate expenditure in elections which is, the Commission underlines, 'another root cause of corruption'.83 Hence the Commission recommends that 'cleansing elections is the most important route to improve ethical standards in politics, to curb corruption and rectify maladministration'.84 What is so striking is that what caused alarm to the 1964 Santhanam Committee continued to remain a source of irritation for the Second Administrative Reforms Commission: indiscriminate and illegal funding of the elections by business and corporations creates an environment in which there emerges a quid pro quo arrangement between the winning candidates and the funding agencies that never allows the system to function appropriately. Hence the Commission has made the following suggestions85 to introduce reforms in the political system:

- A system for partial state funding should be introduced in order to reduce the scope for illegitimate and unnecessary funding of expenditure for elections.
- The issue of disqualification of members on grounds of defection should be decided by the President/Governor on the advice of the Election Commission.
- Section 8 of the *Representation of the People Act, 1951* needs to be amended to disqualify all persons facing charges related to grave and heinous offences and corruption, with the modification suggested by the Election Commission.
- The Constitution should be amended to ensure that, if one or more parties in a coalition with a common programme mandated by the electorate either explicitly before the elections or implicitly while forming the government, realign midstream with one or more parties outside the coalition, then Members of that party or parties shall have to seek a fresh mandate from the electorate.

# **Decadent moral fabric**

Similar to the 1964 Santhanam Committee report that attributed the decline of ethics in governance to 'the lack of moral alertness . . . [hampering] the growth of strong traditions of integrity and efficiency',86 the Second Administrative Reforms Commission insisted on 'the inculcation of values facilitating the subordination of the self to a larger societal good'.87 This cannot be achieved overnight. But a conducive environment can be created by adopting complementary rules and regulations in which these values are well appreciated. The Commission is thus of the view that there should be a set of public service values that should be stipulated by law. As in the case of Australia, there should be a mechanism to ensure that civil servants constantly aspire towards these values. The commission appreciated the values prescribed in the draft Public Services Bill 2006, which was later made into an Act. The salient 'values'88 informing the Act are:

- allegiance to the various ideals enshrined in the preamble to the Constitution
- apolitical functioning;
- good governance for betterment of the people to be the primary goal of civil service;
- duty to act objectively and impartially;
- accountability and transparency in decision making;

- maintenance of highest ethical standards;
- merit to be the criteria in selection of civil servants, consistent, however, with the cultural, ethnic and other diversities of the nation;
- ensuring economy and avoidance of wastage in expenditure;
- provision of healthy and congenial work environment;
- communication, consultation and cooperation in performance of functions i.e. participation of all levels of personnel in management.

Envisaging a public code of conduct and a public service management code insisting on specific duties and responsibilities, the Act is a watershed in so far as public service is concerned. Keeping in view the importance of the public in public services, the Act thus lays out its basic goal by suggesting that (a) good governance is an inalienable right of the citizens in a democracy, (b) good governance should be participatory, accountable, governed by the rule of law and informed by equity and inclusiveness in governance, and effectiveness and efficiency in service, and (c) a politically neutral, professional, accountable and efficient public service is an essential instrument for promotion of good governance.89 In order to fulfil its aim, the Commission thus recommends a Public Service Authority to ensure that the code of conduct is sincerely followed. If stringent punitive measures are applied to punish those deviating from the code of conduct, corruption in public services, the Commission emphatically believes, will be significantly reduced.

 As the above description adumbrates, the arrangement that the Commission proposed is perhaps the best one in putting the civil services in India back on the rails. This also confirms that institutional back up appears to be an adequate shield against the debasement of public services. Implicit here also is the argument that institutional support can never be effective unless there is adequate social back up, which means that social values supportive of corruption- free civil services need to be streamlined and also strengthened wherever necessary. It has thus been argued that

a strong and vigilant civil society can be a check on corruption and form the basis for countervailing action. . . . Even the most comprehensive set of formal democratic institutions may not be in a position to produce the needed accountability in the absence of a strong and vigilant civil society to energize them.90

Civil society in India does not seem to be well enough organized to create a powerful voice. Nonetheless, there have been recent instances, as will be shown in Chapter 6, of civil society activism being very effective in forcing the state to agree to consider and also deliberate on demands that had roots in civil society. These are however stray instances, because civil society- driven participatory governance is still in its infancy in India. Hence social disapproval is hardly a deterrent here, unlike in Japan where the social shaming of civil servants of questionable integrity is an effective form of controlling the deviant public officials. Besides social shaming, political embarrassment acts as an effective deterrent to the errant public authority. The Indian situation is, however, different, and the deviation from the established code of conduct causes embarrassment and may also evoke punishment, if caught, though it cannot be a permanently effective deterrent to those who tend to resort to corruption for personal gain.

 Effective civic engagement in governance is definitely a useful step towards creating an ethics- driven administration, which is designed to decisively challenge sources of corruption. According to the Commission, the role of whistleblowers is critical in exposing corrupt public servants. This is possible if there exists an alert citizenry, which is also sensitive to its moral commitments and responsibility. There is every possibility that the whistleblowers restrain themselves, fearing adverse consequences. This can be addressed meaningfully provided there is a complementary social environment in which these efforts are always appreciated and widely respected. As this is clearly a social cause, the citizens should feel empowered when they are involved in such acts. This is one way of encouraging those who appear to be less fearful about the consequences. There is another way, as the Commission strongly argues, suggesting that the whistleblowers need to have adequate legal protection in case they suffer due to their role in unearthing the roots of corruption. In its recommendations, the Commission, by reiterating the views of the Law Commission of India, forcefully argues for the following steps91 to protect the whistleblowers:

- Whistleblowers exposing false claims, fraud or corruption should be protected by ensuring confidentiality and anonymity, protection from victimization in career, and other administrative measures to prevent bodily harm and harassment.
- The legislation should cover corporate whistleblowers unearthing fraud or serious damage to public interest by willful acts of omission or commission.
- Acts of harassment or victimization of, or retaliation against, a whistleblower should be criminal offences with substantial penalty and sentence.

These are very useful suggestions that the Commission makes, while seeking to provide legal protection. Such legal protection may not, however, be meaningful if there is not adequate social back up. Being aware of this dialectical interconnection between what society transmits and the role of the whistleblowers, the Commission thus points out that what is critical in arresting the governance debasement is

the citizens' voice which can be effectively used to expose, denounce and restrain corruption. This calls for the engagement of civil society . . . in educating citizens about the evils of corruption, raising their awareness levels and securing their participation by giving them a voice. This also introduces a new dimension of accountability [which is contrary to] the traditional horizontal mechanisms of legislative and legal accountability of the executive and internal vertical accountability.92

 There are two fundamental points that the Commission has raised here. Besides underlining the importance of external accountability, the Commission insists, on the one hand, on constant civic engagement as definitely a deterrent to practices thriving on corruption. On the other hand, as a result of civic engagement, the Commission also feels that a powerful citizens' voice emerges, which also acts as an effective hurdle for those preferring corrupt means for selfaggrandizement. These are generally spontaneous endeavours that have 'emerged out of an urge to serve the needs of the common man . . . [although] the state can create an environment whereby citizens' groups can effectively participate in its efforts to root out corruption'.93 The idea is manifested in the citizens' charter, which, being based on citizens' inputs, is an administrative design to make administration accountable and citizen friendly. Insisting that citizens should be made integral to governance to combat tendencies towards appropriating administration for private interests, the Commission thus recommends94 that

- The Citizens' charter should be made effective by stipulating the service levels and also the remedy if these services are not met.
- Citizens may be involved in the assessment and maintenance of ethics in important government institutions and offices.
- Reward schemes should be introduced to incentivize citizens' initiatives.
- School awareness programmes should be introduced, highlighting the importance of ethics and how corruption can be combated.

These are likely to be instrumentally appropriate. The Commission is also aware that adequate social backing for these means is an insurance for their effective articulation. Governance is a collaborative act, which succeeds not because of the institutions, but because of the support that it receives from the citizenry. The more ethically sensitive the government is, the more support it generates among those endorsing its spirit. One of the powerful instruments to ascertain ethics in governance is a social audit, as per the Commission. Appreciative of the means, the Commission thus expresses that

social audit through client or beneficiary groups or civil society is a check on the wrong doing in procurement of products and services for government, in the distribution of welfare payments, in the checking of attendance of teachers, students in schools and hostels, staff in hospitals and a host of other similar citizen service- oriented activities of government.95

As elaborated, social audit is an interface between the state and citizens, in which the latter play a critical role in fulfilling what the former is expected to do to articulate its role as a service provider. The idea that citizens are integral to governance is further reconfirmed. This is most fundamental in conceptualizing governance as a philosophy of collective action, and the Commission, by reiterating the idea, has reconfirmed once again how important it is in fulfilling the primary ideological goal that a government represents.

 The discussion on ethics in governance, though selective, would remain incomplete without a brief note on the Commission's recommendation on the importance of Lokpal as an Ombudsman to effectively address the issue of corruption in India. In consonance with the suggestion of the 1964 Santhanam Committee, the Central Vigilance Commission came into being in 1964. Effective in raising a voice against corruption, the Vigilance Commission did not appear to be adequate to root out corruption in India's public life. The other agency that is critical in corruption- related cases is the Central Bureau of Investigation. Established in 1941 as the Special Police Establishment, responsible for domestic security, it was re- christened the Central Bureau of Investigation in 1963. Deriving its authority from the 1946 *Delhi Special Police Establishment Act*, the Bureau is responsible for investigating certain specified offences or classes of offences pertaining to corruption and other kinds of malpractices involving public servants. Although there are institutions for addressing cases of corruption in public life, 'the working of many of these anti- corruption bodies', the Commission laments, 'leaves much to be desired'.96 In the light of the rather disappointing performances of the available instruments, the Commission feels the need to create a national Ombudsman, Lokpal in Indian parlance, which was also recommended by the First Administrative Reforms Commission in 1964. The Lokpal Bill was not made into law for various politico- ideological reasons, although it was believed that Lokpal could have become an effective instrument to weed out corruption from public life. As will be shown in Chapter 6, the demand for a Lokpal was widespread and provoked a Delhi- based campaign in 2011 that had national implications. Similar to the institution of Ombudsman in the Scandinavian countries, which acts as a bulwark of democratic government against the tyranny of officialdom, the Lokpal was also conceptualized as a watchdog responsible for ascertaining the values of integrity among the ministers and also the members of parliament. In order to discharge its role most effectively, it was also authorized to punish errant members for violating the code of ethics. Although a serious endeavour, the Bill has so far been shelved, since policy makers have failed to arrive at a consensus because of the obvious attack on their impunity. The expression, 'Lokpal' has been replaced by 'Rashtriya Lokayukta', which is the Commission's preferred vocabulary. By insisting on guaranteeing constitutional status and according appropriate constitutional safeguards, the Commission thus recommends97 that

- a The Constitution should be amended to provide for a national Ombudsman, to be called the Rashtriya Lokayukta. The role and jurisdiction of the Rashtriya Lokayukta should be defined in the Constitution while the composition, mode of appointment and other details can be decided by Parliament through legislation.
- b The jurisdiction of Rashtriya Lokayukta should extend to all Ministers of the Union (except the Prime Minister), all state Chief Ministers, all persons holding public office equivalent in rank to a Union Minister, and Members of Parliament. In case the enquiry against a public functionary establishes

the involvement of any other public official along with the public functionary, the Rashtriya Lokayukta would have the power to enquire against such public servant(s) also.

- c The Prime Minister should be kept out of the jurisdiction of the Rashtriya Lokayukta.
- d The Rashtriya Lokayukta should consist of a serving or retired Judge of the Supreme Court as the Chairperson, an eminent jurist as Member and the Central Vigilance Commissioner as ex- officio Member.
- e The chairperson of the Rashtriya Lokayukta should be selected from a panel of sitting Judges of the Supreme Court who have more than three years of service, by a Committee consisting of the Vice President of India, the Prime Minister, the Leader of the Opposition, the Speaker of the Lok Sabha and the Chief Justice of India. In case it is not possible to appoint a sitting Judge, the Committee may appoint a retired Supreme Court Judge.
- f The same Committee may select the Member (i.e. an eminent jurist) of the Rashtriya Lokayukta. The chairperson and member of the Rashtriya Lokayukta should be appointed for only one term of three years and they should not hold any public office under the government thereafter, the only exception being that they can become the Chief Justice of India, if their services are so required.
- g The Rashtriya Lokayukta should also be entrusted with the task of undertaking a national campaign for raising the standards of ethics in public life.

As suggestions, these recommendations are fine and probably reflective of the public concern for effective anti- corruption measures. In terms of substance, these suggestions are not new, but are repeated in a different language. Corruption continues to remain a menace in public life, because of the clear absence of a complementary social climate in which corruption will not flourish as a debilitating social phenomenon. This has two serious policy implications: on the one hand, the creation of multiple institutions for the containment of corruption seems to be vacuous unless they have organic roots in the polity, being engaged in rooting out corruption. The *Lokpal* or *Rashtriya Lokayukta* seems to have institutional polish, but is likely to receive the policy makers' nod simply because of the threat that they would lose their political immunity once these institutions are put in place. So the politico- ideological constraints are impediments to even constitutionally recognizing these agencies. This also directs our attention to how their partisan aims prevail over the public's concern for corruption- free governance in India. This is a reality, though there have been constant endeavours to make these instruments part of the constitutional set- up to root out corruption by giving exemplary punishment to those indulging in corruption and malpractices.

## **Evaluation**

Like earlier efforts, the 2005 Second Administrative Reforms Commission is a serious attempt to weed out corruption from public life. As shown above, the Commission strongly feels that institutional devices are inadequate unless backed by social accountability, which means administrative accountability will merely be cosmetic in nature in the absence of social accountability. A sociopsychological phenomenon, social accountability cannot be created overnight; it requires sustained efforts directed towards creating an environment in which corruption is culturally hated. Institutions responsible for arresting the decline of ethics in governance become far stronger once they are supported by popular will which is manifested in a series of endeavours, articulated by both government and other public agencies. There is no doubt that social accountability is a powerful anti- corruption device; but it needs to be nurtured by creating a culture of political transparency and probity. This is to be supplemented by access to information, because secrecy kills the very drive towards evolving a transparent administration; by ensuring the availability and reliability of information, governance no longer remains a captive of the bureaucrats, but becomes an instrument for public well- being. As is evident, the acceptance of the 2005 RTI radically altered the texture of public governance in India, simply because it allowed the stakeholders to have access to information which Indian bureaucracy never allowed to become public.

 Along with access to information, there are agencies that are critical in creating and strengthening social accountability. One of them is the media, which

has a crucial role in the preservation, monitoring and control of corruption . . . [by informing and educating] the public on corruption, [exposing] corruption in government, private sector, civil society organizations and [helping] monitor codes of conduct while policing itself against corruption.98

So, media is a powerful medium through which social accountability is articulated. By raising awareness around public issues, disseminating findings and creating a platform for public debate, a sensitive media gets connected with governance, which newly spreads its tentacles beyond the formal bureaucracy.

 That social accountability is a force to reckon with is possible only when an equally strong and alert civil society backs it up. The success of civil society initiatives is contingent on their legitimacy and representability and also their level of responsiveness and accountability to their own members. In other words, not only do they promote an enabling environment in which citizens get drawn to governance, they also provide useful inputs to the policy makers, which they derive out of their engagement with grassroots activities. The role of the state is equally critical because 'the success of social accountability initiatives also depends upon the capacity and effectiveness of the state . . . [which, by being appreciative to] a political or administrative culture that values notions of public . . . probity, accountability and equity' lays out a complementary system in its

support.99 One has to remember, however, that on its own neither the state nor civil society is adequately equipped to articulate social accountability in its substantial sense. Hence what is required is 'state–civil society synergy' because 'unilateral state action normally ends up in manipulation, while unilateral social action often ends in repression and violence by the state, and that the most productive results arise when both sides actively participate'.100 As argued, independent of the state, civil society is futile and vice versa. To make social accountability an effective instrument to ascertain ethics in governance, what is thus required is an interface involving both the state and societal actors. There is one final point here. Social accountability initiatives are required to be institutionalized; otherwise, they become part of the vocabulary with little or no substance. It has thus been argued that 'the impact is greatest and most sustainable when social accountability mechanisms are institutionalized – in other words, embedded with and systematically implemented by a civil society, state or hybrid institution'.101 As shown, conceptually, social accountability is an effective means to consolidate an environment supportive of drives towards instilling the values of ethics in governance. By creating new effective vertical mechanisms of accountability and strengthening the prevalent devices for horizontal accountability, social accountability can be said to be useful for better governance in which the role of the stakeholders is as critical as those who are officially responsible for translating into legislative decision of the political bosses' ideological priorities. With a focus on accountability and the machinery for its inculcation in public life, the 2005 Second Administrative Reforms Commission thus stands out not merely for its penetrating recommendations, but also for creating a momentum for change by raising a debate in the public domain on the dialectical linkages between the decline of ethics in governance and the moral decadence of India's social fabric.

## **The role of the ethics committees**

Apart from the above major institutional steps, Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha, the two chambers of the Indian parliament also expressed concern over the decline of ethics in governance. Inspired by the functioning of the ethics committees in both houses of the US Congress, the upper chamber of the Indian parliament took the lead and formed an Ethics Committee in 1997 to address the concern. The *Lok Sabha* soon followed and, in 2000, the *Lok Sabha* Ethics Committee came into being. Based on their desire to revive public faith in the institutions of governance, these committees made useful recommendations, which are partly drawn from some of the available codes of conduct and partly derived from practices being followed elsewhere. Since the *Rajya Sabha* Ethics Committee was formed earlier than its *Lok Sabha* counterpart, we will deal with the former first, to be followed by a discussion of the latter.

## **The Rajya Sabha Ethics Committee**

In response to the findings of the 1994 Vohra Committee highlighting the nexus between criminal gangs, police, bureaucracy and politicians, the 1995 All Party meeting felt the need for the setting up of a parliamentary committee on ethics, as distinct from the Committee of Privileges which would act as a guardian on the activities of members of parliament. It was also decided by the participants that Rajya Sabha needed to have 'an internal mechanism' which would act as 'a self- regulatory body' for the members of India's second chamber. The idea was justified by stating that 'a well- functioning Ethics Committee and well laid out procedures were the best guarantee for a correct perception in the public about an in- house mechanism for ensuring the ethical conduct of members'.102 In his welcome address, S B Chavan, the Chairman of the *Rajya Sabha* Ethics Committee, justified the formation of the committee by saying that

by and large, the ideological base and the spirit of service which activates most of the politicians is getting eroded and the kind of elements who are trying to influence the political parties and political system at large, make everybody think as to how we can possibly bring about probity in the entire system. The formation of the Ethics Committee as one of the instruments to ensure value- based politics has become imperative in the present situation. . . . The Committee will persuade the members not to do such things which, perhaps, were beyond the accepted norms of behaviour.103

In tune with the same spirit, the leader of the opposition, Rajya Sabha, Sikander Bakht, became far more categorical in his condemnation of the politicians who were held responsible for the decline of ethics in public life. He thus stated that

our character is viewed with suspicion. Our tribe lost the faith of the people. Corruption has permeated not only the tribe of politicians but also society at large . . . [and] I believe the constitution of the Ethics Committee is the need of the hour. The politicians are on the receiving end of people's criticism and complaints. There is a great need to improve this image of politicians. The Ethics Committee may perhaps be of some help'.104

The Ethics Committee, constituted in 1997, remains a milestone in India's parliamentary politics for two reasons: on the one hand, it articulated the concern of the parliamentarians who felt terribly alarmed at the rapid decline of ethics in governance; on the other hand, it also reinforced, the public outcry against the abuse of governmental machinery for personal gains. In its first report of 1999, the Committee attributed the decline of moral values among those in public life to the rather lackadaisical attitude of the political parties in selecting candidates to fight elections on their behalf. The Committee observed that it was mainly the responsibility of political parties to prevent persons with criminal antecedents from entering the political process. Hence the Committee urged that political parties needed to be selective when recruiting candidates for membership in the

Rajya Sabha or other political outfits, being engaged in public work. Like the 1964 Santhanam Committee, the All Party meeting also endorsed the need for electoral reforms, including 'the revision of the ceiling on election expenses, corporate or State funding of political parties, foreign donations to them, among others'.105 The decline was evident; but the Committee did not seem alarmed because, by following the 1994 Nolan Committee on Standards in Public Life of the United Kingdom, it felt that once the loopholes in the procedures were sealed, most of the public grievances could satisfactorily be addressed.

 Like the Vohra Committee, the *Rajya Sabha* Ethics Committee took serious note of (a) criminalization of politics and (b) the felt need for massive electoral reforms. While criminalization of politics cannot be weeded out so easily, given its deep roots in socio- political processes, it will be easier to undertake meaningful electoral reforms. The Committee thus felt that 'the laws and rules . . . have not had the desired effect . . . and the problem of criminalization of politics and its causes and effects cannot be tackled by legislation alone'.106 Instead of taking a legalistic view, the Committee decided to interact with the political parties to evolve a code of conduct for the members. Insisting that the political parties should avoid nominating those with criminal records, the Committee echoed the suggestion made by the 1964 Santhanam Committee. The most serious problem that attracted serious attention of the Committee was the role of the power of money in elections. It was admitted that 'large sums of money and other monetary benefits encourage the electorate for [parliamentary elections] leading sometimes to the defeat of the official candidate belonging to their own political party'.107 The solution was simple: there was a need 'to incorporate suitable provisions in the existing electoral laws with a view to breaking the nexus between the power of money and elections'.108 This is easier said than done, since the vested interests are too powerful to give away the advantages of being financially supported during the election, though the campaign seeking to break the nexus between the power of money and elections appears to have gained a momentum which cannot be wished away so easily.

 The concern about ethics for its members figured prominently in the recommendations of the *Rajya Sabha* Ethics Committee, which strongly felt that

the Members of Rajya Sabha should acknowledge their responsibility to maintain the public trust reposed in them and should work diligently to discharge their mandate for the common good of the people. They must hold in high esteem the Constitution, the Law, Parliamentary Institutions and, above all, the general public. They should commonly strive to translate the ideals laid down in the Preamble to the Constitution into a reality.109

For the *Rajya Sabha* members, the Committee had set out a specific code of conduct, which drew on the desire to establish high moral standards. This is an elaborate checklist of dos and don'ts, applicable to the members who are elected to serve the public. Unless they share the motivation of public service, they are unable to appreciate the code of ethics that the Committee had proposed. Comprising 15 items, the code of conduct is primarily a set of authoritative directions to the members, who need to follow them to morally justify their role as part of public policy making. There are three major instructive items, which are reproduced below110 to highlight the thrust of the recommendations:

- In their dealings if Members find that there is conflict between their personal interests and the public trust, which they hold, they should resolve such a conflict in a manner that their private interests are subordinated to the duty of their public office.
- Members should always see that their private financial interests and those of the members of their immediate family do not come in conflict with the public interest and if any such conflict ever arises, they should try to resolve such a conflict in a manner that the public interest is not jeopardized.
- Members should never expect or accept any fee, remuneration or benefit for a vote given or not given by them on the floor of the House, for introducing a Bill, for moving a resolution, putting a question or abstaining from asking a question or participating in the deliberations of the House or a Parliamentary Committee.

As is evident, there have been continuous efforts to create an environment that is appreciative of the importance of ethics in public life. The growing criminalization of politics is certainly a source of serious concern. How to halt the processes of criminalization? It was suggested by the *Rajya Sabha* in a resolution that 'meaningful electoral reforms be carried out . . . [so that] political life and processes be free of the adverse impact on governance of undesirable extraneous factors including criminalization'.111 What is being emphasized here is institutional reforms that are capable of reforming the habits of members of India's second chamber. Undoubtedly, institutional reforms are an effective means, provided they are backed by equally effective mechanisms that are not guided by partisan political priorities. Unless this is appreciated by those involved in policy making, institutional reforms will hardly be meaningful.

 The decline of ethics in governance cannot be completely done away with by mere institutional reforms; what it requires is also to undertake appropriate steps to create processes for change in the wider social environment. The inculcation of ethics by the Ethics Committee will be futile unless the values of ethics are sincerely upheld by the people at large. Hence it is suggested that the exercise will completely be wasted unless it is complemented by parallel endeavours in evolving practices appreciative of ethics in public life. While identifying the Ethics Committee as certainly a definite step towards strengthening the campaign for ethics in public life, it was thus argued that

the Ethics Committee is not intended as an essay in idealism, but as an exercise in pragmatic politics. It does not seek to usher in a moralistic regime in Parliament, but common ethical standards and decency in the conduct of its members, including, of course, ministers. . . . It will help in dissipating the

widely held belief that 'politics are a dirty game' repeated often by politicians and the public with some sort of acceptance of the inevitability of unethical behaviour in the practice of the political game.112

As has been argued, the appointment of the Ethics Committee is a significant step towards seeking to ensure ethics in public life. This is not enough if public life is vitiated to a significant extent. Only through 'continuous and proactive efforts, . . . greater transparency, probity and accountability in public life [are] ensured'.113 These are values which are critical in evolving conditions appreciative of ethics- driven governance. Key to such a system of governance is the citizen, who holds the substance of participatory democracy. Conceptualizing citizens as proactive members in administration, the arguments in support of ethics in public life endorse the view that 'citizens are equal partners in all spheres of national endeavours, and not simply the beneficiaries of governmental initiatives'.114 What it reinforces is the fundamental argument that institutional initiatives do not seem to be effective unless they receive adequate backing from the wider social environment. This is, however, not to argue that the former is absolutely futile; on the contrary, they remain critical in raising issues of ethics in the public domain, which may further expedite effective campaigns in their favour. So it will not be an exaggeration to suggest that the dialectical interconnection between internal initiatives and the wider social milieu help build a momentum for ethics in public life.

## **The Lok Sabha Ethics Committee**

While the Rajya Sabha Ethics Committee was formed in 1997, the Lok Sabha counterpart came into being in 2000. Unlike the Rajya Sabha Ethics Committee, it took a rather narrow view in suggesting the remedies for decadence in governance. In its first report of 2001, the Ethics Committee of Lok Sabha thus reiterated that

norms of ethical behaviour for members of the legislature had been 'adequately provided for' in the rules and procedures, directions by the Speaker and in the conventions which have evolved over the years on the basis of the recommendations made by various Parliamentary Committees.115

For the Committee, the steps towards containing the decadence were very simple: the remedy with regard to unethical behaviour on the part of the legislators lay 'in the strict enforcement of the existing norms'.116 Apart from the prevalent norms, the members should, according to the Committee, abide by the following general ethical principles:117

- members must utilize their position to advance well- being of the people;
- in case of conflict between their personal interest and public interest, they must resolve the conflict so that personal interests are subordinate to the duty of public office;

- conflict between private financial/family interest should be resolved in a manner that public interest is not jeopardized;
- members holding public offices should use public resources in such a manner as may led to public good;
- members must keep uppermost in their mind the fundamental duties listed in the Part IV [Directive Principles of State Policy] of the Constitution; and
- members should maintain high standards of morality, dignity, decency and values in public life.

 The approach that the *Rajya Sabha* Ethics Committee adopted was allinclusive because, simultaneously with creating and also consolidating institutional backups, it also suggested changes in the wider social environment, because of its complementary role in creating a propitious environment for reform. The *Lok Sabha* counterpart held a contrary view, by emphasizing that internal institutional mechanisms were adequate to guide the members in accordance with the best of ethical values. The rules are in place; since they are not properly implemented, the system suffers. This is a difficult proposition with a very limited appeal, though it is true that tendencies towards encouraging deviation in governance are likely to be reduced to a significant extent if the rules are stringently applied regardless of class, caste and ideological inclinations. These tendencies, instead of being discouraged, seem to have been continuously boosted due to very specific socio- economic and ideological circumstances being nurtured in India, which also had a long colonial past. Despite being politically free, India is one of those countries in the developing world that keeps on suffering due to the elite capture of political authority, which impedes, to a great extent, the processes towards democratizing governance resulting in the marginalization of a large segment of the populace. This is probably the key to understanding the decline of ethics in public life, because, if governance is democratized, it will create space for the peripheral sections that, despite being franchised, continue to remain mere pawns in the chess of politics. Since ethics is a socio- psychological phenomenon, endeavours towards its creation by institutional means can never be successful; what is thus needed is a substantial overhauling of the social environment, in which individuals are psychologically inclined to uphold those ethical values ensuring public well- being. Although there is a consensus that social environment is always critical, the role of induced institutional changes cannot be undermined. By meting out exemplary punishment to those abusing public authority, the available institutional mechanisms help build a momentum in the wider social milieu which, if guided properly, is likely to trigger a bigger campaign for reform in governance. Hence it is always argued that they are dialectically interconnected: institutional steps are useful inputs for social awareness, and impulses from society do not allow the institutions to remain indifferent when they are strong enough to create a momentum involving large segments of population. As history has shown, this is how the concern for ethics becomes an integral component of democratic governance in which citizens, by virtue of being its core, always remain an important source of inputs for public authority.

### **Concluding observations**

Unlike the 1966 First Administrative Reforms Commission, the 2005 Second Administrative Commission focused on the deterioration of ethics in public governance. After having made a thorough analysis of the phenomenon, the Second Commission attributes the visible decline of ethics to a whole range of factors, including the socio- psychological decline of the individuals responsible for redrawing India's path for development. In the light of a general degradation of public administration, the Commission thus observed that 'in our case, at times public office is perceived to be an extension of one's property. That is why sometimes, public offices are a source of huge corruption and a means of extending patronage'.118 The idea that public authority was one's personal fiefdom, which the Santhanam Committee criticized so strongly, continued to remain a constant source of irritation, even in the context of a globalizing India. This is understandable since governance is still bureaucracy controlled, though it is open to external influences that considerably weaken the bureaucratic hold over administration. The Moily report is thus a watershed, because it has articulated the newer socio- ideological concerns, meaningful in the changed milieu in conjunction with the forces supportive of a declining, but not entirely defunct, system of governance.

 Similarly, the Ethics Committees of *Lok Sabha* and *Rajya Sabha* are also serious endeavours towards creating an environment by devising a long checklist of dos and don'ts for the parliamentarians. Whether mere codification of rules will yield the desired results is a debatable issue. Nonetheless, the acceptance of a code of ethics for the policy makers is, by itself, a significant development in the light of how the members of parliament recklessly exercise authority to fulfil their personal ambitions. Despite being on paper without perhaps much effectiveness, these codes can be said to have ushered in an era in which the parliamentarians are not without shackles, because the violation of the code will never go unnoticed in view of an alert civil society.

 The above analysis also reveals that ethics or integrity is socio- psychological in character: social because, unless these values are socially backed, they hardly have any relevance whatsoever; and also psychological since they need to be articulated in the behaviour of those constituting a polity. It is true that the Moily Commission recommended strengthening the available institutional devices and also creating new ones if necessary; but, by insisting on developing a supportive social climate, the Commission underlines the importance of the wider social milieu in sustaining the drive for ethics in public governance. In a similar fashion, the Ethics Committees for *Lok Sabha* and *Rajya Sabha* lay down certain terms and conditions for the parliamentarians, who are not only policy makers, but are also major keys in the processes shaping India's ideological contour and depth. By seeking to train the parliamentarians in a specific way to inculcate basic values of ethics, these Committees act as their moral guardians. Whether they will achieve their desired goal is difficult to assess now, though the fact that they have become integrally connected with the parliamentary procedure in India also confirms that they cannot be so easily dismissed. Ideologically innovative, these Committees, despite not having substantial authority, are likely to be effective instruments in raising a voice in the public domain against the deviant parliamentarians, which, by itself, is a deterrent. So, in terms of what these Committees can do, there is huge potential, provided they are proactive in fulfilling their social role in a democratic political set- up. As their counterparts in the US have already shown in their history of just five decades, the parliamentary Ethics Committees in India are also potentially strong enough to fulfil their assigned task, provided it is adequately socially backed. There is thus a fundamental point that is being reiterated throughout the discussion: the dialectical interconnection between the institutional devices and the wider social environment is a key to ethically sound and contextually relevant governance, which also means that neither the institutional devices nor a sensitive social climate is independently capable of being a strong defence against tendencies towards derailing public authority. What is thus required is to create an environment in which the ideologically backed institutional devices derive sustenance from the social environment and vice versa; only then, perhaps the goal of building a robust culture of integrity can easily be fulfilled.

### **Notes**

- 1 S Radhakrishnan, 'The dawn of freedom' in Rudrangshu Mukherjee (ed.), *Great Speeches of Modern India*, Random House, New Delhi, 2007, pp. 181–2.
- 2 Speech delivered by Rajiv Gandhi, former Prime Minister of India, on 28 December 1985 in Bombay – quoted in B P Mathur, *Ethics for Governance: reinventing public services*, Routledge, New Delhi, 2014, p. 198.
- 3 Tenth Five Year Plan, Vol. 1, p. 22 quoted in B P Mathur, *Ethics for Governance,*  p. 197.
- 4 Eleventh Five Year Plan, pp. 236–7, quoted in B P Mathur, *Ethics for Governance*, p. 197.
- 5 *Report of the Committee on Prevention of Corruption*, Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India, New Delhi, 1964, p. 2.
- 6 Ibid., p. 5.
- 7 Ibid., p. 7.
- 8 Ibid., p. 9.
- 9 Ibid., p. 117.
- 10 Ibid., p. 9.
- 11 Ibid.
- 12 The Licence–Quota–Permit Raj refers to a bureaucratic system drawn on the stringent government authority in granting licenses and permits for new commercial ventures. Coined by a leading nationalist C Rajagopalachari, the system remained operational till 1990 and the adoption of the New Economic Policy which, by deregulating the Indian economy, was a strong step towards making it defunct.
- 13 *Report of the Committee on Prevention of Corruption*, p. 12.
- 14 Ibid.
- 15 Ibid.
- 16 Ibid.
- 17 Ibid., pp. 77–8.
- 18 Ibid., p. 78.
- 19 Ibid., p. 101.