# **The Colonial State**

# Mahendra Prasad Singh

ketching the historical evolution of the Indian state, particularly the British colonial state, is necessary for an adequate understanding of Indian politics. This task is, however, fraught with methodological problems. This is so on account of the zigsaw puzzle of piecing together the intricate chronological and thematic units in time and place among the diverse statesystems which cover the space. Temporal and theoretical disjunctures often appear impossible to bridge due to the paucity of data and conceptual imprecision. Professional historians may feel inclined to shy away from some of these methodological traps, taking shelter in specialization in the historiography of any specific state of broad periodization of Indian history into ancient, medieval, and modern. But, a political scientist in his long march into history to understand and explain continuity and discontinuities in India's past and present must confront these problems headlong, albeit candidly highlighting the methodological problems in this endeavour. The first part of this paper sketches the evolution of the state in India in terms of the prevailing historiography on the topic. Besides, it seeks to conceptualize and fill in the gaps in the theoretical understanding of the British colonial and post-colonial states in India. The second part presents a critique of the historiography of some states in Indian history. The third part concludes this essay with an outline of the institutional legacies of the states in Indian history of the post-colonial Indian nation-state.

### ı

We can delineate at least three broad themes of transition having a direct bearing on the evolution of the Indian state. First, there is the transformation of a pre-state social formation based on lineage and tribe in the state. This happened in the Vedic or post-Vedic societies in the North and Sangam period in the South at the dawn of history in these regions. Presumably, a similar transition must have transpired in the pre-Vedic

period in the Indus valley and other Harappan and Mohanjodaran sites in the North-West with their centres in Sindh and Punjab, where either a theocratic state or a republican oligarchy is supposed to have existed. While no textual sources are still available for the Indus valley and the Indus script inscribed on archaeological effects remain undeciphered, the tribal and pastoral beginnings are reconstructed from the Sangam literature much in the same way as in the North from Vedic and Buddhist texts. Paradoxically, urban-industrial Indus valley civilization antedates the pastoral beginnings in the Vedic and Sangam periods, the former not very distant in time and place from the Indus valley. It may well be that the Indus culture was the metropolitan centre of the primitive peripheries of the same Indus state to which the pastoral Aryans migrated in hordes from Central Asia. This probably happened at a time when the metropolis were devastated by a natural calamity of great magnitude causing the peripheries to fall into a more primitive existence. Of course, we need historical evidence to corroborate these surmises.

Second, there is the transformation of regional kingdoms into subcontinental states through much of Indian history by a recurrent process of emergence, disintegration, and re-emergence. Beginning with the post-Vedic proto-states (*mahajanapadas*) and their transformation into states in the pre-Mauryan period, among whom Magadha under the rule of the Nandas was the centre of political gravity, the process culminated in the formation of the Maurya state (321-185 BC) in Magadha, the first subcontinental state in Indian history. The *saptang* theory of the state with seven constituent elements—monarch, ministers/bureaucrats, territory/population, fort, treasury, sceptre, and allies—outlined in Kautilya's *Arthashashtra* is commonly regarded as the textual blueprint of this transition. Indologist J.C. Heesterman argues that from the internal evidence of the text itself it appears that there were chinks in bureaucratic procedures, especially in audit and accounts, that betrayed tribal traces making the *mahamatyas* (accountants/auditors) co-sharers in royal powers rather than subordinate to the king. However, what Heesterman makes out to be co-sharing in royal power is easily amenable to an interpretation of autonomy of the officials in a technical field in the first most complex and extensive state in the world until that time. On the decline and disintegration of the Mauryan Empire, smaller kingdoms, and regional states followed that dotted the historical landscapes for a millennium and a half. This period witnessed the phenomenal increase in frequency of the land grants by the state to Brahmans and state officials. This practice resulted in the rise of feudalism. During this period, the important landmarks were the states founded by the Guptas and Harsha (300-700 AD), the Delhi Sultanate (1200-1526 AD), and Vijayanagara (1300-1526 AD). From the third decade of the 16th century to the beginning of the 18th the Mughal state ruled the roost over much of the subcontinent as the most important subcontinental state before the British colonial state that continued until independence in 1947. The Maratha and the Sikh states in the 18th century were the two important states that followed the decline of the imperial Mughals, but they were overtaken by the British colonial state, to which the post-colonial Indian state is the most significant successor.

Third, there is, as already hinted above, the transformation of the 'state'<sup>1</sup> based on British colonial economy and bureaucratic organization into a democratic and sovereign nation-state. This state-system sets off the twin processes of industrialization and democratization that ushered India into the modern world. Western education and capitalist development in the industry were initiated by the British rulers in India that irreversibly undermined the Indian tradition. The British also laid the foundation of the first merit-based bureaucracy in India that replaced the patrimonial bureaucracy of the Mughal and post-Mughal states. All these trends gathered fuller momentum in the post-independence period.

Taking strands from British and Mughal conceptions of monarchical and patrimonial bureaucratic traditions, the British with some modifications erected the viceregal system with first modern structures of bureaucracy and army in India. The British Raj, thus, became the most developed absolutist state claiming to be benevolent in Indian history. Social and cultural historians generally perceive a great deal of continuity between the pre-colonial and colonial periods of Indian history.<sup>2</sup>However, a student of the modern state in India cannot escape discovering a major break in its politicalinstitutional complex with the founding of the British Raj, even though the basically authoritarian viceregal system *prima facie* resembles the ancient and medieval Indian absolute monarchies rooted in the Hindu and Indo-Islamic political ideas. Indeed, by virtue of the British colonial heritage in South Asia, the successor states in the region became heirs to two strands of institutional legacies, those of the viceregal system and the Westminster model of parliamentary government in combination with federalism like Canada and Australia.<sup>3</sup>

During the Raj, however, it was the authoritarian strain of the institutional seed which was more in tune with the traditional state systems of India's past than with the modern British political heritage that flourished. For this reason, it would not be out of place to draw a comparison between the British colonial state in India and the absolutist states of late medieval Europe. Functionally, the colonial state in India was neither comparable to the Bonapartist or Prussian Junker state holding the balance between feudal aristocracy and emergent bourgeoisie<sup>4</sup> nor the Andersonian model of European absolutist state which was essentially a reinforced apparatus of feudal domination of the peasantry.<sup>5</sup> It did not either belong to the category of 'patrimonial authority'<sup>6</sup> or 'patrimonial bureaucratic empire'.<sup>7</sup> It was instead a political instrument of the British imperial or metropolitan capitalist state, and, for this reason, largely undetermined by the mode of production in colonial India. Much like the European absolutist state, the British Raj led to the onset of political and economic forces that produced for the first time in Indian history rational-legal structure of bureaucracy in the Weberian mode. However, due to the crucial factor of colonial intervention in the Indian case the British Raj founded a colonial state dependent on the metropolitan state, but enjoying a large measure of autonomy from the class and ethnic configurations in the colony itself. The colonial state, thus, built up a system of power shaped by a coalition of the dominant classes in the metropolitan state in London supervising over a subordinate coalition of a dominant class—dominant vis-a-vis the colonial class configuration—the adversarial targets of the classes active in the nationalist movement against colonial rule. Thus, whereas the imperial state was functionally and reciprocally conditioned by the full-fledged twin processes of industrialization and democratization, the colonial state in India was ultimately an instrument of the imperial state, but as a state since it was secondarily influenced by the coalition of classes and ethnic groups in the colony. Only with this kind of conceptualization, we can: (1) bring out a sharper focus in the liberal strands in Anglo-American colonialism as distinguished from continental European colonialism; (2) do justice to the incrementally democratic features of constitutional reform in India introduced by the British Parliament pointing towards a parliamentary and federal form of government in the long run; and (3) underline the evolution of consensus during the nationalist movement in favour of the Westminster model and its adoption by Independent India's Constituent Assembly in 1950.

The long-term effect of the British rule both in the Company and the Crown phases was the gradual weakening of the traditional aristocracy (landed classes) and the rise of the middle classes that gradually filled the space vacated by the former. The middle classes 'included university students and teachers, barristers and lawyers, writers and newspaper editors, educated proprietors, and well-to-do traders'. Ironically, it was the princes and *zamindars*, who, after an initial revolt, remained allied with the British Raj, while the middle class (excepting those who joined the bureaucracy) forged an alliance with the Indian industrialists and the peasants against the British.

With the consolidation of the British rule in India, capitalist and precapitalist modes of production came to co-exist in a dynamic state of transition to capitalism. This resulted in the gradual destruction of the age-old methods of peasant and craft production under an imperialist regime of capitalism geared to the colonial extraction or revenue and raw materials for metropolitan industrialization and imperial expansion and exploitation of the Indian market for the commodities produced by British industries. Besides, a class of indigenous capitalists within the colony also developed in due course as also a middle class of the new elites educated in colleges and universities established by the British rulers. The industrial working classes also slowly, but steadily emerged in the new industrial towns and cities. Colonial rule, thus, despite its pretentious notions of the 'whiteman's burden' and its extractive and exploitative nature, also generated some unintended consequences, such as the rise of a nationalist movement that weaved a cluster of ethnic groups into a nation for the first time in Indian history, for, though a common cultural consciousness had existed from time immemorial, the nation-state was a modern phenomenon.

Now, moving from the Raj phase of the modern Indian state to its Swaraj phase, we must develop an understanding of the post-colonial Indian state in terms of its continuities and departures from the British Indian colonial state. On attaining political independence in 1947, India turned its back on two aspects of its colonial heritage: (1) the political-institutional legacies of the viceregal model of the bureaucratic state; and (2) the legacies of the political economy of dependency on metropolitan capitalist centres.

The modernizing nationalist elite established the framework of a liberal-democratic state with a parliamentary-federal government, constitutionally guaranteed Fundamental Rights of citizens, and an incipient welfare state promised in the Directive Principles of State Policy. The preamble of the Indian constitution proclaims it a 'sovereign, socialist, secular, democratic republic'. It would be a gross oversimplification to describe this state as an instrument of any dominant class or ethnic group. The Indian state derives its 'autonomy' (in democratic theory) or 'relative autonomy' (in the neo-Marxist theory) from its social/class base from the liberal-democratic constitution under which it has been founded as well as from the fact that, instead of any one class or group ruling over it, only a complex coalition of classes exercise dominance over it. Pranab Bardhan, an economist, argues that in one liberal-Marxist (or neo-Marxist) formulation, a conflict-ridden coalition of three 'dominant proprietary classes'-industrial capitalists, rich farmers, professionals (civil, military, and white-collar)-hold the key to political power in the Indian state. He goes on saying that a wide disparity separates this top two deciles from 'the bottom half of the population living in abject poverty', but the dominant coalition must contend with significant conflicts of interest' within its own ranks which have 'serious repercussions on the fortunes of economic growth, and of the democratic polity'.

To take the tack of the political economy of development, it is a commonplace that colonialism in India created some preconditions for economic and political development, but its primary upshot, beginning with the First World War, was this country's growing multilateral integration with advanced capitalist metropolitan centres of the West on the condition of dependency. On attaining freedom in 1947, the adoption of the Nehru-Mahalanobis strategy of economic development in the Second Five-Year Plan set the basic parameters of planning as rapid industrialization with the accent on a dominant public (state) sector and a self-reliant economy.

These strategies of political-institutional development and economic development together generated a complex dialectics with an immense transformative potential. The principal components of this transformation were: (1) a restructuring of economic dependency on metropolitan capitalism into independent economic development; (2) promoting state capitalist and capitalist developments in the urban sector; (3) transition from semifeudal agriculture to capitalist farming; and (4) democratization of a largely authoritarian society and polity to begin with, and once this made some headway, federalizing the predominantly parliamentary system established under the 1950 constitution.

Finally, a word about the two major directions of change affecting the Indian state since the 1990s and the unfolding future. Both are related to the somewhat contradictory global trends of economic and political liberalization that gathered momentum in the late 1970s and 1980s. In the Indian context, these developments are manifested on two planes. There is, first the policy of economic liberalization. And, secondly, there are the mounting pressures, for federalizing the predominant parliamentary system to accommodate a greater degree of autonomy for the states in the Indian federal union. Powerful alternative ideologies favouring the market and state governments have come to the fore, though the public sector and the Centre still continue to be powerful yet a series of policy changes have withdrawn, to a significant degree, controls that the state exercised over the private corporate sector and sought to reorient the hitherto inward-looking importsubstitution economy by one in which a growing reliance is placed on the private sector, both national and multinational. The new policy thrust has resulted from a constellation of factors in the post-Nehru era, for example, as policy failure on economic front in the public sector bedevilled by huge losses, inefficiency, political populism, and corruption; success of the private sector in industry and agriculture; the emergence of a middle class and a new generation of political elites at the top with favourable orientations towards the Western pattern of capitalist development and consumerism, and so on.

The federalization thrust was earlier broadly confined to the regional elites and the state party systems. The regionalist thrust was buttressed by the rise of 'bullock capitalists' (the term is the Rudolph's, 1987) and the 'Other Backward Classes' (read castes) since the late 1960s. These social and political forces succeeded in pressurizing the then Prime Minister Indira Gandhi to appoint the Sarkaria Commission on Centre-State Relations in 1983, which submitted its monumental two volume report in 1987-88. In the 1989 Lok Sabha elections, the national party system assumed a multipartisan pattern, breaking out of the mould of a basically predominant party system under the aegis of the Congress party holding the sway most of the time since Independence. The mid-term parliamentary elections in May-June 1991, by and large, maintained the multi-party system of polarized pluralism introduced by the previous Lok Sabha elections in 1989.<sup>8</sup> The federalizing thrust of the new phase of the party system continued unabated through the 1990s and mid-2020s. This makes the search for a new federal consensus an urgent imperative.

# **II**

In this section, we would sketch the historical roots of the post-colonial Indian state. From the beginning, two contradictory as well as complementary patterns of state formation developed simultaneously in Indian history that was continued even by the mighty British colonial state. Centralized bureaucratic administration with direct rule in the territorial core was always complemented by non-bureaucratic modes of incorporation that contended with indirect rule by the central authority in the peripheries. This overarching framework of domination allowed a complex coexistence of the secular and the sacred, the pan-Indian and the region at sovereign cults, like *Dhamma* and *sulh-i-kul* and spiritual cults like *Bhakti* and *Sufi silsilas*, a great tradition in culture and small-group orientations of the village society. Thus, sovereignty in Indian history was ambivalently both crystallized and diffused, centralized and decentralized; it not only allowed appreciable autonomies to groups and regions within the state but also visualized a complex interstate alliance system in the subcontinental interstate configuration in which allies were constituents of the subcontinental super state itself. The network of the federal and state governments established under the 1950 constitution is the first state to rule India directly under a common framework of modern political bureaucratic and economic institutions.

The post-colonial liberal-democratic state in India has sprung from complex historical roots such as these. The immediate inspiration for the democratic, federal and bureaucratic features of the state was, of course, the British rule in India and the British, Canadian, American, Irish, and Australian constitutions. However, the indigenous sociological and ideological influences of the Mughal and Maratha states, the nationalist movement, and the given structures of ethnicity should not be lost sight of. The Mauryan *mahamatta* system and the Mughal *mansabdari* system provide historical antecedents of the British Indian Civil Service and the post-independence all-India services. The ritual sovereignty of the Vijayanagara monarchs, Maratha diarchy between the nominal monarch and the hereditary *Peshwa* (premier) and the *ajnapatra* (ordinance) on the eve of the Maratha conquest in the 18th century, which ordains a 'dualist' authority of 'warriors' and 'ministers' in the administration, may be seen as the indigenous precedent of liberalization of the state structure that may have probably led to the denouement of 'constitutionalism' even without the British and nationalist interventions. The long-span nationalist movement against the colonial rule, that made a moderate appearance in the last quarter of the 19th century and passed through several phases, engendered a pervasive ideological debate and produced a consensus on the constitution and the policy-frame and planning in the new nation. The sprawling caste system and religious and linguistic communities make India a nation of minorities, despite the Hindu majority and the nearmajority of Hindi speakers federally. All these legacies and factors together make India an exciting experiment in democracy, economic development, and nation-building.

# **Notes and References**

- 1. 'Colonial state' is a contradiction in terms-either a country is a colony or a state. However, in view of substantial autonomy of the elaborate apparatus of the British Indian administration 'across the seven seas' form London one is inclined to use the term.
- 2. AT. Embree (1989, p. 5) for example, observes: "One of the ineluctable facts of Indian history is that fundamental institutions survived, although they underwent great changes, during over 500 years of political domination by Turkic and other Islamic rulers, and during the century and half of British rule in the subcontinent. These changes were sometimes imposed by the rulers, sometimes they were indigenous to India, and it is almost incidental that they took place during a period of foreign rule".

 Dinkar (1962) sees India's composite culture as a synthesis between Aryan, Dravidian. Hindu-Buddhist-Jain,. Hindu-Islamic, and Indo-European cultural streams.

- 3. Myron Weiner (1989, ch. 3) draws attention to these twin legacies, but calling the second of these a 'British democratic model' glosses over the combination of the parliamentary government with federalism in India as in Canada—1867 and Australia in 1991.
- 4. Out of the two models of the state—the class dominated and Bonapartist (relatively autonomous from its class-base)—in Marx, the latter is outlined in his 'From the Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte' in Marx, Engels, Lenin (1972, pp. 120–133). See also Tom Bottomore *et al.* (eds.) (1983, p. 53).
- 5. Perry Anderson (1979, p. 18) interprets the European absolutist state as 'a *redeployed and recharged apparatus of feudal domination*, designed to clamp the peasant masses back into their traditional social position despite and against the gains they had won by the widespread commutation of dues' (emphasis in the original).
- 6. See Max Weber (1946, p. 298) on the concept of 'Patrimonialism'.
- 7. On the concept of 'Patrimonial-Bureaucratic Empire' as applied to Mughal state, see Stephen Blake (1979, pp. 77–94).
- 8. For a discussion of this phase of Indian party system, see M.P. Singh (1992 *a* and *b*) and M.P. Singh and Rekha Saxena (2011)

## **Bibliography**

- Altekar, A.S., *State and Government in Ancient India.* Delhi, Motilal Banarsidass, 1958, 3rd ed.; first published 1949.
- Anderson, Perry, *Lineage of the Absolutist State.* London and New York, Verso, 1979; first published 1974.
- Bagchi, Amiya Kumar, *The Political Economy of Underdevelopment.* Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1982.
- Bailey, A.M. and J.R. Llobera (eds.), *The Asiatic Mode of Production: Science and Politics.*  London; Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1981.
- Bardhan, Pranab, *The Political Economy of Development in India.* Delhi: Oxford University Press, 1984.
- Basham, A.L., *The Wonder That Was India.* Calcutta: Rupa Paperback, 1981; first published 1954.
- Bhattacharya, Sibesh, 'Political Authority and Brahman-Kshatriya Relationship in Early India: An Aspect of Power Elite Configuration'. *Indian Historical Review*, Vol. X, Nos. 1-2 (July 1983-January 1984).