#### **8**

# COMPLEXITY OF LAND, POPULATION, THE ENVIRONMENT AND DEVELOPMENT

This chapter discusses the complexity of conflict between land, population, the environment and development in India, in a historical perspective. This chapter is divided into nine sections. The first section deals about the landless communities and their living conditions. The second section analyses the trends of agricultural labourers. The third section deals about people living in the forests and the impact of conservation initiatives on their livelihood from the late nineteenth century onwards. The fourth section deals with the trend of landholding patterns. The fifth section analyses as to how the development projects have displaced the people from land and the initiatives that were made to compensate and rehabilitate them. The sixth section analyses to what extent the forest was diverted to various development measures. The seventh section deals about how the political economy played around landless people, tribals and the people who had lost their land due to various development projects during the post-Independence period. The eighth section deals with how the population, the environmental concerns and issues of development of the people was addressed during the post-Independence period and the last section ends with the concluding observations.

## *LANDLESS COMMUNITIES AND THEIR LIVING CONDITIONS*

During the precolonial period or at the time of colonial annexation, the Scheduled Castes (SCs) people lived as slaves, bonded labour or attached labour invariably in different parts of the country.<sup>1</sup> Even in the varna system, they were not brought under any one of the four varnas*.* But their services were used for a wide range of production-related activities of economy and even in cultural and religious traditions. Their numerical strength accounts for almost one-fifth of the total population and they inhabit virtually in every village in the country. Even within the villages, they are located in the lowest strata of the main village are totally isolated from the villages. They have been continuously exploited

not only during the precolonial period but till the end of colonial rule in one or the other form in different parts of the country. Sadly, it continues even till date.

Despite several social movements that arose in the early nineteenth century, they failed to address the SC problems. However, since the early nineteenth century, several leaders not only from SC category but also from other castes have raised their voice against the exploitation of SCs in different parts of the country. The prominent leaders of those times were Sri Vaikunda Swamikal (1809–1851), Jotiba Phule (1827–1890), Ayothidas (1854–1914), Sri Narayana Guru (1856–1928), Rettamalai Srinivasan (1860–1945), Ayyankali (1863–1941), Erode Venkatappa Ramasamy (1879–1973) and Bhimrao Ramji Ambedkar (1891–1956) among scores of others.

Though several SC leaders and nationalist leaders addressed the problems faced by the SCs, until Independence, however, no constructive development measures were initiated by the colonial administration. Even though some measures were eventually taken, those confined only to a particular region. In other words, until the end of the colonial rule, the socio-economic conditions of the SCs have not changed and have remained just as they were in the late eighteenth century. It is evident from the census enumeration that they were classified as agricultural labourers. While the Census Report of 1871 had classified their occupation as labourers, reeling under poverty, in the subsequent decades also there was no perspective change in their lives. One of the earliest colonial records, 'Socio-Economic Conditions of Chengalput *Paraiahs*' (SC), in 1892, states that the people of this community were '… always badly nourished; clad, if at all, in the vilest of rags; eaten up with leprosy or other horrible diseases; hutted like pigs; untaught; unearned for, and unpitied.'2 The condition was more or less similar in the districts adjoining Madras and elsewhere in the Madras Presidency during the nineteenth century at a time when there was no state intervention to promote their or even other communities socio-economic advancement. Of course, their conditions are not much different in other parts of the country. At the time of early Independence, the conditions of the SCs were narrated by Keer:

Their social disabilities were specific, severe and numerous…. They were forbidden to keep certain domestic animals, to use certain metals for ornaments; were obliged to wear a particular type of dress, to eat particular type of food, to use particular type of footwear, and were forced to occupy the dirty, dingy and unhygienic outskirts of villages and towns for habitation where they lived in dark, insanitary, and miserable smoky shanties or cottages … were denied the use

of public wells, and were condemned to drink any filthy water they could find. Their children were not admitted to schools attended by the caste Hindu children. Though they worshipped the gods of the Hindus, observed the same festivals, the Hindu temple were closed to them. Barbers and washermen refused to render them service.... As they were illiterate, ill-treated and untouchables to ages, all public services including police and military forces were closed to them…. Thus being deprived of social, religious and civic rights, they had no chance of bettering their conditions, and so these untouchable Hindus lived the life of a bygone and dead age, dragging on their miserable existence in insufficient accommodation, insanitary surroundings and social segregation.<sup>3</sup>

 In other words, the SCs were faced with extreme forms of discrimination due the caste system and untouchability, which is evident in the wide inequality between the SCs and other communities.

The post-Independent India's governments have made several provisions in the Indian Constitution for the socio-economic development of the SCs. Article 46 of the Constitution provides that the State shall promote with special care the educational and economic interests of the weaker sections of the society and, in particular, that of the SCs and Scheduled Tribes (STs), and shall protect them from social injustice and all forms of exploitation. Reservation in educational institutions has been provided in Article 15(4) while reservation in posts and services has been provided in Article 16(4), 16(4A) and 16(4B) of the Constitution. Of course, B.R. Ambedkar was instrumental for the inclusion of these provisions. Based on the constitutional provisions, the Central Government and the state governments have made several programmes/schemes to uplift the SC peoples' living conditions. Invariably, in different rural development programmes, the share of the SCs has been earmarked. Indeed, it is missed opportunities for the SCs. The land reforms were not implemented which led to their detriment. However, if they were implemented, the SCs would have got their due share in the process of distribution of lands. Despite the constitutional provisions, acts, programmes and schemes, and the vision of Ambedkar for the SCs' developments, nothing concrete has been achieved. In other words, the above-mentioned intervention mechanism did not make any impact on their political and socio-economic development. Even though the SCs were given political empowerment in Lok Sabha and other the local bodies, the elected representatives of the SC category have nevertheless failed to address their community's problems and have always stood by their party line rather than being guided by their

community's interest. Consequently, the living conditions have also not improved when compared to other communities. In other words, populist schemes of each successive government were only aimed at consolidating the SC vote-bank, and in the process, prevented transformation of their socio-economic conditions.<sup>4</sup> Nonetheless, all these provisions, unfortunately, were sacrificed for sheer political survival and popular political vote-bank politics. Consequently, over the last seven decades, their living conditions have hardly improved.

#### *TRENDS OF AGRICULTURAL LABOURERS*

As we have discussed in the previous section, certain communities have engaged as agricultural labourers during the precolonial period and the other communities were also added to this category since the early colonial period. For example, to some extent, the tribal communities have become an agricultural labourer's category due to the establishment of tea and coffee plantations in different hills and elevated ranges in different parts of the country since the second quarters of the nineteenth century.

Since the mid-nineteenth century, population has steadily increased and the concurrent proportion of agricultural labourers has also increased remarkably. For example, at the close of the nineteenth century, about 16 per cent of the population was classified as agricultural labourers in the Madras Presidency. Since the late nineteenth century, the proportion of agricultural labourers has gradually increased in the subsequent decades and it has reached about 29 per cent at the end of colonial rule. Since the colonial government did not make any efforts to secure the structural transformation or to protect and promote the agricultural labourer communities, their proportion has continued to increase during the entire colonial period.

In fact, the colonial government policies have led to the large-scale growth of agricultural labourers over the one and half centuries. Since the second quarter of the nineteenth century, establishment of the coffee and tea plantations have displaced a large number of the tribals.<sup>5</sup> Since the last quarter of the nineteenth century when the reserve forest was introduced, the natural right of the tribals to clear the land was curtailed. At the same time, the tribals' land alienation was not prevented. Consequently, a large number of the tribals lost their land and have become agricultural labourers at the end of the colonial rule.<sup>6</sup> In addition to the agricultural labourer communities, colonial policy had also added a sizeable proportion of the tribal communities into the agricultural labour category.

In addition to these agricultural labour communities, the postcolonial government has further added others under this category. The land acquisition exercise for the various development activities has displaced a large number of the cultivators and converted them into agricultural labour communities without any rehabilitation and resettlement policies in place for their social security.<sup>7</sup> Consequently, the proportion of the agricultural labourers has increased during the post-Independence period. In 1951, about 28.09 per cent of the agricultural workers were classified as agricultural labourers and it has increased to 55 per cent in 2011. In other words, the agricultural labourers have almost doubled within the seven decades of the post-Independence period. In addition to the government policies, population growth too has compelled million to join the agricultural labour category. Unfortunately, the government policy towards a large segment of the population has ended with providing some kind of subsidy based on a type of subsistence strategy, without any supporting constructive development measures. Consequently, these agricultural labourers' category has remained dominant in the poverty-stricken group.

# *IMPACT OF EXTERNAL INTERVENTION, CONSERVATION INITIATIVES AND TRIBALS LIVELIHOOD*

In the Indian subcontinent, about one-tenth of the population is tribals and is living in the elevated hilly ranges. They were not noticed by the colonial administration until the early nineteenth century. Invariably, in different hill ranges, the tribals were inhabited since the ancient period. For example, Val Vil Ori, a philanthropist, ruled the Kolli hills during the Ancient period.<sup>8</sup> The Kalrayan hills were not noticed by the colonial administration till the second quarter of the nineteenth century.<sup>9</sup> The tribals lived in the hilly areas and maintained their livelihood from within the forest resources with limited interaction with the people of the plains. Precisely, nearly one-tenth of the population of the Indian subcontinent has lived in the isolated hilly ranges, until the end of the colonial era without any integration process.

After Independence, the postcolonial government was also not concerned about these isolated tribal people until the last quarter of the twentieth century. During the Fifth Five-Year Plan, the Government of India has introduced the tribal sub-plan. Under this plan, 193 Integrated Tribal Development Projects (ITDPs), 253 Modified Area Development Projects (MADPs) and ninety-three Primitive Tribal Groups (PTGs) were identified and various development measures have been initiated in different parts of the country. Under this programme, various infrastructural facilities have been developed but, in reality, these programmes facilitated the non-tribals to settle in the erstwhile tribal areas.10 In other words, wherever the infrastructural facilities were developed in the hilly areas, the non-tribals alienated the tribal lands and the state also has encroached on the tribal lands for tourism development projects, and has further aggravated the situation. The tribal land alienation acts have been enacted in different states but only after the land alienation process was completed.11 Providing the infrastructural facilities was the political economy of the last quarter of the twentieth century and facilitating them to access the forest resources during the early part of the twentieth century. To be precise, while restricting their livelihood options during the colonial period, the postcolonial policies have either displaced them from their livelihood options and the government initiative have pushed them further into deep forest and finally they were compelled to move into the forest due to populist vote-bank politics.

#### *TREND OF LANDHOLDING PATTERN*

Since Independence, more and more areas were brought under cultivation. For example, in 1960–1961, about 131,500 thousand hectares of land brought under cultivation and it has increased to 159,592 thousand hectares in 2010–2011. In other words, about 28,092,000 hectares of additional land was brought under cultivation within fifty years from 1960–1961 to 2010–2011 (Table 8.2). Despite bringing more area under cultivation, holdings have greatly increased in the marginal categories. In 1960–1961, about 41 per cent of the total number of holdings was under the marginal category and it has increased to 67 per cent in 2010–2011. In other words, more than two-thirds of the holding have come under the marginal holdings. Likewise, the other categories, viz., small, semi-medium holdings have also increased over the last five decades, while, the number of large holdings has declined drastically.

Though the number of small and semi-medium category increased and their proportion share to the total number of holdings has not increased, it has, however, declined from 22.3 per cent and 18.18 per cent in 1960–1961 to 17.9 per cent and 10 per cent in 2010–2011 respectively. The number of holdings for both medium and large categories declined from 13.5 per cent and 4.7 per cent in 1960–1961 to 4.3 per cent and 0.7 per cent in 2010–2011 respectively (Table 8.1).

|                                                                                                                                       | Category of Holdings |      |        |      |             |           |        |      |        |      |         |     |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------|------|--------|------|-------------|-----------|--------|------|--------|------|---------|-----|
| Year                                                                                                                                  | Marginal             |      | Small  |      | Semi-Medium |           | Medium |      | Large  |      | Total   |     |
|                                                                                                                                       | Number               | ℅    | Number | ৡ    | Number      | ℅         | Number | ℅    | Number | ℅    | Number  | ℅   |
| 1960-1961                                                                                                                             | 19,900               | 40.7 | 10,900 | 22.3 | 9,200       | 18.8      | 6,600  | 13.5 | 23,000 | 4.7  | 48,900  | 100 |
| 2010-2011                                                                                                                             | 92,356               | 67   | 24,705 | 17.9 | 13,840      | $\approx$ | 5,856  | 4.3  | 1,000  | 0.7  | 137,757 | 100 |
| Area                                                                                                                                  |                      |      |        |      |             |           |        |      |        |      |         |     |
| 1960-1961                                                                                                                             | 88,000               | 6.7  | 16,000 | 12.2 | 26,200      | 19.9      | 40,100 | 30.5 | 40,400 | 30.7 | 1,314   | 100 |
| 2010-2011                                                                                                                             | 35,908               | 22.5 | 35,244 | 22.1 | 37,705      | 23.6      | 33,828 | 21.2 | 16,907 | 10.6 | 159,592 | 100 |
| Sources: Agricultural Census Report (various years); Ministry of Agriculture, Agricultural Census Report, Delhi: Government of India. |                      |      |        |      |             |           |        |      |        |      |         |     |

The area under marginal, small and semi-medium category has increased from 6.7 per cent, 12.2 per cent and 19.19 per cent in 1960–1961 to 22.5 per cent, 22.1 per cent and 23.6 per cent in 2010– 2011 respectively. The share of the medium and large holdings in comparison has declined during the same period. Precisely, 85 per cent of the land holdings belonged to the marginal and small categories which occupied about 45 per cent of the total cultivated area.

## *DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS AND DISPLACED PEOPLE FROM LAND*

During the post-Independence period, the various development projects, such as dams, mines, industries, wildlife and others have displaced a large number of people.12 According to Fernandes and Paranjape, about 213 lakh people have been displaced due to the development projects between 1951 and 1990. Of the displaced people, 164 lakh by large and medium dams; 25.5 lakh by mines; 12.5 lakh by industries; 6 lakh by national parks and wildlife sanctuaries; and 5 lakh by various other projects. Among the developmental projects, dams have accounted for more than three-fourths (77 per cent) of the total displaced people in India, during the first four decades of the post-Independence period. For irrigation and hydroelectric projects, about 3,634 dams (major and medium) have been constructed during the same period. On the whole, about 25.5 lakh people (12 per cent) due to mines; 12.5 lakh people (5.9 per cent) due to industry; 6.0 lakh people (2.8 per cent) were displaced due to wildlife; and the rest of 5 lakh people (2.3 per cent) due to other development projects during the first four decades of the post-Independence period (Table 8.2).13

Of the displaced people (213 lakh), only 53.8 lakh people, which forms about 25 per cent, have been resettled during this period. In other words, about 25–30 per cent of the displaced people in different types of development projects have been resettled. The rest, i.e., 159.2 lakh displaced people, which forms about 75 per cent were neither resettled nor rehabilitated.

|                     |                                               |                                      | Table 8.2: Total Number of Persons and Tribals Displaced by Various Developmental Projects in India during 1951–1990 |                                                   |                      |                |                                   |                                       |                                                          |                                             |                                              | (inlakh)       |
|---------------------|-----------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|----------------------|----------------|-----------------------------------|---------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------|----------------|
| Projects<br>Type of | All Devel-<br>(in lakh)<br>Projects<br>opment | Projects<br>opment<br>Devel-<br>% of | Resettled<br>Projects<br>(in lakh)<br>opment<br>Devel-                                                               | Resettled<br>Projects<br>Devel-<br>opment<br>% of | (in lakh)<br>Backlog | Backlog<br>(%) | Displaced<br>(in lakh)<br>Tribals | placed<br>Persons<br>% of all<br>Dis- | Displaced<br>Resettled<br>(in lakh)<br>Persons<br>Tribal | Persons<br>placed<br>Tribal<br>% of<br>Dis- | Backlog<br>of Tribal<br>Displaced<br>Persons | Backlog<br>(%) |
| Dams                | 164.0                                         | 77.0                                 | 41.00                                                                                                                | 25.0                                              | 123.00               | 75.0           | 63.21                             | 38.5                                  | 15.81                                                    | 25.0                                        | 47.40                                        | 75.0           |
| Mines               | 25.5                                          | 12.0                                 | 6.30                                                                                                                 | 24.7                                              | 19.20                | 75.3           | 13.30                             | 52.2                                  | 3.30                                                     | 25.0                                        | 10.0                                         | 75.0           |
| Industries          | 12.5                                          | 5.9                                  | 3.75                                                                                                                 | 30.0                                              | 8.75                 | 70.0           | 3.13                              | 25.0                                  | 0.80                                                     | 25.0                                        | 2.33                                         | 75.0           |
| Wildlife            | 6.0                                           | 2.8                                  | 1.25                                                                                                                 | 20.8                                              | 4.75                 | 79.2           | 4.5                               | 75.0                                  | 00.1                                                     | 22.0                                        | 3.50                                         | 78.0           |
| Others              | 5.0                                           | 2.3                                  | 1.50                                                                                                                 | 30.0                                              | 3.50                 | 70.0           | 1.25                              | 25.0                                  | 0.25                                                     | 20.0                                        | 00.1                                         | 80.0           |
| Total               | 213.0                                         | 100                                  | 53.80                                                                                                                | 25.0                                              | 159.20               | 75.0           | 85.39                             | 40.9                                  | 21.26                                                    | 25.0                                        | 64.23                                        | 79.0           |
|                     |                                               |                                      | Source: Fernandes and Paranjape, Tribals Displaced: The Price of Development. <sup>14</sup>                          |                                                   |                      |                |                                   |                                       |                                                          |                                             |                                              |                |
Of the displaced people (213 lakh), 85.38 lakh, which forms about 40.9 per cent belongs to the tribals, and 25–75 per cent of the tribals were displaced invariably due to different types of development projects during the first four decades of free India. Of the displaced tribals, little more than one-fifth of them were resettled in different types of the development projects during the same period. In other words, about 64.23 lakh tribals were displaced due to the various development projects, which amount for about nearly 80 per cent of people who were left unsettled during the post-Independence period. Precisely, around 213 lakh people were displaced, of which only one-fourth was resettled and the rest of them were left unsettled, of the displaced people more than 40 per cent of them were tribals.

# *DIVERSION OF LAND FOR VARIOUS DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS*

For the various development projects, apart from private land, other common property resource including forest land was diverted during the post-Independence period. Private lands and forests were diverted for the various development purposes along with the establishment of tea and coffee plantations since the early nineteenth century, and the forest lands were given off to the tribals and other forest-dwelling communities since the early part of twenty-first century.

# **Forest Land**

Since the onset of the early nineteenth century, forests and elevated hill ranges were diverted to establish several tea and coffee plantations in different parts of the country.<sup>15</sup> Since Independence, a large extent of the forest land was diverted for the various development projects by the state governments. Between 1950 and 1980, on an average about 1.5 lakh hectares of the forest land was diverted for the various development purposes.16 Before 1980, the forest was a State Subject. Until the 1980s, the Central Government did not have any power to regulate the diversion of forest for the various development activities. Due to the indiscriminate cutting and diversion of forest land, forest was brought from State List to Concurrent List through the 42nd Constitutional Amendment in 1976.17 Based on the constitutional amendment, the Government of India has enacted the Forest Conservation Act in 1980. This act promulgated that without consulting the Ministry of Environment and Forests, the

Government of India, the states cannot divert the forest land and it has also laid down that an equal level of afforestation has to be achieved. Between 1980 and 2016, 21,885 diversion cases occurred which involved about 897,698.40 hectares (Table 8.3). Consequently, diversion of forest land has declined to around 24,936 hectares per annum between 1980 and 2016. Many states, such as Madhya Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Orissa, Gujarat, Punjab, Telangana, Arunachal Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand, have diverted reserve forest on a massive scale. Most of the development activities during the modernisation process of the post-Independent India. Despite the constitutional amendment, diversion of forest land continues unabated even today.

**Table 8.3:** State-wise Number of Cases and Total Area Diverted for Forest Land under Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980, in India (25 December 1980 to 25 July 2016)

| States/UTs                  | Number of<br>Cases | Land Diverted (in<br>hectares) |
|-----------------------------|--------------------|--------------------------------|
| Andaman and Nicobar Islands | 91                 | 2,435.73                       |
| Andhra Pradesh              | 345                | 24,891.78                      |
| Arunachal Pradesh           | 192                | 32,167.21                      |
| Assam                       | 240                | 2,956.47                       |
| Bihar                       | 147                | 5,526.96                       |
| Chandigarh                  | 31                 | 89.36                          |
| Chhattisgarh                | 422                | 84,475.02                      |
| Dadra and Nagar Haveli      | 149                | 275.03                         |
| Daman and Diu               | $\mathbf{1}$       | 3.95                           |
| Delhi                       | 15                 | 42.21                          |
| Goa                         | 81                 | 2,022.85                       |
| Gujarat                     | 1,306              | 63,964.41                      |
| Haryana                     | 2,698              | 5,933.85                       |
| Himachal Pradesh            | 1,416              | 12,675.87                      |
| Jammu & Kashmir             | 7                  | 656.45                         |
| Jharkhand                   | 320                | 21,791.57                      |
| Karnataka                   | 683                | 43,273.79                      |
| Kerala                      | 224                | 40,747.34                      |
| Lakshadweep                 | $\mathbf{0}$       | 0.00                           |

| States/UTs     | Number of<br>Cases | Land Diverted (in<br>hectares) |
|----------------|--------------------|--------------------------------|
| Madhya Pradesh | 996                | 245,978.53                     |
| Maharashtra    | 1,394              | 60,001.21                      |
| Manipur        | 34                 | 3,015.07                       |
| Meghalaya      | 96                 | 767.95                         |
| Mizoram        | 23                 | 6,237.24                       |
| Nagaland       | $\mathbf{0}$       | 0.00                           |
| Orissa         | 478                | 48,535.22                      |
| Pondicherry    | 1                  | 0.96                           |
| Punjab         | 3,390              | 63,371.73                      |
| Rajasthan      | 652                | 25,674.94                      |
| Sikkim         | 350                | 2,628.59                       |
| Tamil Nadu     | 437                | 2,421.87                       |
| Telangana      | 226                | 22,299.08                      |
| Tripura        | 296                | 7,832.60                       |
| Uttar Pradesh  | 871                | 19,029.30                      |
| Uttarakhand    | 4,166              | 41,662.34                      |
| West Bengal    | 107                | 4,311.92                       |
| India          | 21,885             | 897,698.40                     |

*Source*: Lok Sabha Starred Question No. 221, dated on 2 August 2016.

# **Private and Common Property Land**

Private lands and other common property lands were diverted for various development activities since the early part of the nineteenth century. These diversions were undertaken at the presidency level, albeit on a small scale. Since the mid-nineteenth century to till the end of the colonial rule, thousands of hectares of land and common property resources have been acquired for the development of the railway network. However, other development activities were very limited during the colonial period. Since Independence, to a large extent private and common property lands were diverted for various development projects. For instance, in 1950–1951, about 9.36 million hectares, which constitute about 3.29 per cent of the reporting area was classified as the land under non-agricultural use, and it has gradually increased to 26.4 million hectares in 2010–2011. The growth rate between 1950–1951 and 2010–2011 was about 182 per cent (Table 8.4). In other words, the land under non-agricultural use category has increased nearly threefold within seven decades.

| Year          | Area  | Percentage |
|---------------|-------|------------|
| 1950-1951     | 9.36  | 3.29       |
| 1960-1961     | 14.84 | 4.97       |
| 1970-1971     | 16.48 | 5.42       |
| 1980-1981     | 19.6  | 6.44       |
| 1990-1991     | 21.09 | 6.92       |
| 2000-2001     | 23.75 | 7.78       |
| $2010 - 2011$ | 26.4  | 8.59       |

**Table 8.4:** Land under Non-Agricultural Use in India, 1950–1951 and 2010–2011 (*in million hectares*)

*Source*: Government of India, *Agricultural Statistics at a Glance 2016.*<sup>18</sup>

### **Restoration of Forest Rights Act**

While emphasising the environmental protection, the popular vote-bank politics of political parties in power paved the way to divert the forest land and resources ever since the early twenty-first century.19 The Government of India has enacted the Scheduled Tribes and Other Forest-Dwelling Communities (Restoration of Forest Rights) Act in 2006. This act extended various privileges to the tribals and other forest-dwelling communities to access the forest resources without any restrictions. It also has empowered to initiate various development activities and the responsibilities were given to the local communities. As on 31 March 2017, 45 lakh claims were made and about 30 lakh hectares of forest land was allotted under the ownership rights.20 Populist vote-bank politics paved the way not only for the ownership rights but also provided the access of forest resources. Until 2005, the non-tribals in the tribal/hilly areas were portrayed as an encroachers/exploiter. However, after 2006 they have recognised them as forest-dwelling communities and were entitled to ownership rights as well as the right to access the forest resources. The extent of the diversion of forest land was very limited until the onset of colonial period. Especially, after Independence, these diversions took on mammoth proportion until the 1980s and it has considerably reduced in the subsequent decades. But it has further aggravated with the popular politics from 2008 onwards led to the provision of ownership rights and forest rights to the tribals and other forest-dwelling communities in the India.

# *POLITICAL ECONOMY PLAYED AROUND LANDLESS* PEOPLE, TRIBALS AND THE PEOPLE WHO LOST THE LAND

The condition of the agricultural labour communities was pathetic and deplorable and no attempts were made to address their problem until the

last decade of the nineteenth century. In fact, the various SC leaders have started addressing their problems during the last phase of the nineteenth and early phase of the twentieth centuries. Since the early twentieth century, other leaders like Periyar and nationalist leaders like Gandhi began to address the problems of these agricultural labour communities. Consequently, in the early 1940s, the Indian Nationalist Congress (INC), Agricultural Wing, proposed land reforms. If the land reforms were implemented, the landless agricultural labourers would have owned some land for their livelihood and sustenance. However, after Independence, the feudal dominated elected representatives hindered the land reforms, particularly distribution of surplus lands. Though the INC proposed to consolidate the landless agricultural labour community during the anticolonial movement, they have remained dependents even in the post-Independence period. In other words, in the electoral democratic majority, land-owning communities did not agree to share their property. Consequently, for the landless agricultural labourers owning land became a distant dream and it seems that it will end like that in future.

### *SCHEDULED TRIBES*

The political economy of tribal development in the late 1970s and restoration of forest rights act in 2006 have to be looked at from a historical context. To regain the tribal vote-bank the Congress Party that had lost in early 1970s, introduced tribal development strategy during the Fifth Five-Year Plan and enjoyed their support until the early 1990s and again, when the Congress Party lost its support during the late 1990s and the early 2000, it seared the enactment of Restoration of Forest Rights Act, 2006. The vast array of tribal development strategies in the late 1970s has secured the tribal vote-bank for the Congress and the party has sustained it over a one and half decades until it started losing during the late 1990s.

Since the forest and tribal economy are inter-linked, the political economy of the tribal development politics is a pivotal one. The tribal development strategy that was initiated during the Fifth Five-Year Plan period has not made any positive impact on the socio-economic transformation of the tribals.21 Consequently, the tribal socio-economic conditions deteriorated and their means of livelihood declined across the country. The economic transformation of the tribals too has not occurred as nearly half of the tribal workforce turned into agricultural labourers. The deterioration of the tribals economic status was mainly based on two factors. First, a large number of tribals were displaced due to various development projects during the post-Independence period.

And, second, the tribal land alienation by the non-tribals. Since the Fifth Five-Year Plan, various infrastructural facilities were developed in different hill regions which facilitated easy accessibility to the tribal areas. Consequently, a large number of non-tribals got settled in the tribal areas and alienated the tribals from their lands. The prohibition of tribal land was largely initiated after large-scale alienation has already taken place. Hence, a sizeable proportion of cultivators has lost their lands and thus became agricultural and other wage labourers.

Efforts to transform the socio-economic conditions of tribals have not only failed but also adversely affected their means of livelihood. On the one side, the forest department has withdrawn the livelihood options and, on the other hand, various development projects and nontribal settlements have led to the displacement of tribals from their own land. Hence, the tribal people have lost their faith in the development strategies and as a result, the Congress Party subsequently lost its support base of the tribals.

 The Congress Party lost its tribal vote-bank in the 1999 and 2004 parliamentary elections. To regain the confidence of tribals vote-bank, the Congress Party has introduced the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest-Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006, as a rectification measure for the historical injustice. Precisely, the political economy of both tribal development strategies and restoration of forest rights acts were initiated to restore the lost vote-bank by the Congress during the early 1970s and late 1990s and the early 2000 respectively.

#### *DISPLACED PEOPLE*

During the colonial period, the land acquisition method for public purposes was very limited; hence there was not much problem. On the one hand, the colonial administration acquired only a very small extent of land and on the other hand, due to the low density of population a large extent of land resources was unutilised. Of course, the public purpose was largely confined to roads, water supply, drainage systems, schools, etc.

The political economy of the Congress government during the 1980s has extended the incentives and facilities to the private sector which has led to serious consequences for the private land resources in the subsequent decades. On the one hand, the amendment in the land acquisition act has facilitated the inclusion of large number of private enterprising activities, and as for public purposes on the other hand, the housing policies were opened up to the private sector.<sup>22</sup>

During the 1980s, the political economy of these two important policies, viz., Land Acquisition (Amendment) Act, 1984, and housing policies in favour of private sector resulted in a series of implications for the private land resources. The Land Acquisition (Amendment) Act, 1984, has provided a detailed definition for the 'corporation owned or controlled by the state' and for 'public purpose'. In Section 3, 'Definition' after clause (c) the following clause (cc) 'Corporation owned or controlled by the state' was inserted; and also, for 'public purpose' a detailed explanation was incorporated. The amendments made in 1984 in the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, ended any differentiation between acquisition for a state purpose and—acquisition for a private enterprise or—state enterprise by amending Section 4 of the original act to insert the words—or for a company after—any public purpose. The courts have interpreted this amendment to mean that any notification of acquisition issued under Section 4 need not specify whether the acquisition is for a—public purpose or for—a company. This opened the floodgates to acquisition of private land by the state for companies. And this in turn has unleashed the tribal and rural backlash that has caused the current decision of the government to replace the 1894 Act with an altogether new act.<sup>23</sup>

The Seventh Five-Year Plan (1985–1990) has envisaged 'the major responsibility for house construction would have to be left to the private sector' and here government has to facilitate 'the development of suitable housing sites on a large scale'. It has emphasised that the government has to undertake land acquisition and development in urban areas for housing and the construction activities were to be left to the private sector. In other words, 'the Government had to play an active role through developing the necessary delivery system in the form of a housing finance market and taking steps to make developed land available at right places and at reasonable prices.' The first one has impacted on the process of acquiring private land and common property resources in general for private and company interests and the second one, largely affected the private land for private and company commercial motives in the name of public purpose. This policy actually facilitated the private sector to acquire private land for the commercial gains in the name of public purpose. These two initiatives during the 1980s led to severe protests from the farmers in the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries, particularly in the non-Congress Party ruling states like West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh and Odissa, paving way for the enactment of Fair Compensation of Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013. The Congress has taken up this issue and turned into a saviour of the farmers to regain the farmers vote-bank in the non-Congress ruled states.

### *CONFLICT BETWEEN POPULATION, ENVIRONMENT AND DEVELOPMENT*

Given the background in the early section, the question of how to manage the environment and secure development in the face of increasing population as well as longevity of the people in the country is an important fundamental question for both development economists and the political executives and it needs to be addressed adequately. Three decades back, the Bourdaland Commission emphasised upon methods to preserve the environment for the future generations. It is important to preserve our natural resources for the future generations and there is no doubt about. However, the question is how to ensure the sustainability is an important question that remains to be answered! Of course, in certain sectors, such as non-conventional energy, efforts have been made during the post-Independence period.

Given the natural resources and optimum level of population, both environment and development and its sustainability can be maintained. Whereas, given the finite natural resources and high rate of population growth posed challenges in terms of both the environment and development. The situations become more unmanageable when the resources are unequally distributed/controlled. For example, in India over the 85 per cent of the land resources are controlled only by the 45 per cent of the landed area. About 15 per cent of the households are controlling about 55 per cent of the cultivated area. In fact, merely 5 per cent of the households' control one-third (33 per cent) of the cultivated area. This wide and unequal distribution of land resources is now a major challenge to ensure the development and sustain environment. Land acquisition for the development projects has affected a large number of marginal and small farmers more than that of the semi-medium, medium and large farmers. Against this background, the development projects have largely benefitted the semi-medium, medium and large-scale farmers; for example, in terms of electricity, irrigation projects, warehouses, storage, marketing facilities, etc. In other words, about 40 per cent of the households constitute agricultural labourers for whom irrigation, dams, electricity related development projects are merely meaningless. Most of the irrigation dams and hydroelectric projects developed in the hilly regions have displaced a large number of tribal people.

### *CONCLUSION*

This chapter deals with the complexity of land, population, environment and development dilemmas in the India. Historically, certain communities

lived as agricultural labourers without owing any land. In addition to the traditional agricultural landless labour communities, other communities were also included in this category, which made up 40 per cent of the total work force in the 2011 Census. The people lived in the forests and their livelihoods were curtailed and their land was also alienated extensively during the post-Independence period. In addition to this, the growing population depended solely on agriculture for their occupational needs. This has resulted in the increase of marginal holdings. More than 85 per cent of the small and marginal farmers controlled only 45 per cent of the land area. Further, land acquisition for the development activities mainly affected marginal and small farmers besides diverting the forest areas for these purposes. Further, it also captures how the political economy played around the landless people, tribals and displaced people. This chapter has thus aimed to capture the complexities of land, population, the environment and development from the landless, tribals and displaced people's perspective, and as how the political economy of environment and development has taken place at the cost of the landless agricultural labourers, tribals and displaced people for the interests of the rich, feudal lords and upper castes in the Indian subcontinent.

### *NOTES AND REFERENCES*

- 1 Dharma Kumar, *Land and Caste in Southern India: The Conditions of Agricultural Labourers in Madras Presidency* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1965).
- 2 G.O. No. 1010, 1010A (Chennai: Tamil Nadu State Archives), 2.
- 3 Dhananjay Keer, *Dr. Ambedkar: Life and Mission* (Bombay: Popular Prakashan, 1954), 1–2.
- 4 Velayutham Saravanan, 'Bhimrao Ramji Ambedkar Vision on India's Development: Post-Independence Experience', *Journal of International and Area Studies* 1, no. 1 (2019): 142–169.
- 5 Velayutham Saravanan, 'Colonialism and Coffee Plantations: Decline of Environment and Tribals in Madras Presidency during the 19th Century', *IESHR* 41, no. 4 (2004): 465–488.
- 6 Velayutham Saravanan. 'Tribal Land Alienation in Madras Presidency during the Colonial period: 1792–1947', *RDC* 6, no. 1 (2000): 73–104.
- 7 Velayutham Saravanan, 'Land Acquisition Act in India: Impact on Environment and Livelihood, 1824–2013', *NMML* Occasional Paper no. 46 **(**New Delhi: NMML, 2014), 1–58.
- 8 Velayutham Saravanan, 'Genesis of Hill Inhabitants in Tamil Nadu: A Review' (mimio).
- 9 Velayutham Saravanan, 'Colonial Commercial Forest Policy and the Tribal Private Forests in Madras Presidency: 1792–1881', *IESHR* 40, no. 4 (2003): 403–423.