# **The Hadza**

#### **Frank Marlowe**

## **ALTERNATIVE NAMES**

Hadzabe, Hadzapi, Hatsa, Tindiga, Watindiga, Kangeju, Wakindiga.

## **LOCATION AND LINGUISTIC AFFILIATION**

The Hadza are located at approximately 3 south, 35 east, around Lake Eyasi, North Tanzania, Africa. Their language, Hadzane, has clicks, and for that reason has often been classified with the San languages of southern Africa, but may be only very distantly related (Sands, 1995).

## **CULTURAL OVERVIEW**

The Hadza are nomadic hunter–gatherers who live in a savanna–woodland habitat around Lake Eyasi in northern Tanzania (Woodburn, 1968). They number about 1,000 (Blurton-Jones, O'Connell, Hawkes, Kamuzora, & Smith, 1992), of whom many are still full-time foragers and almost none of whom practice any kind of agriculture. Men collect honey and use bows and arrows to hunt mammals and birds. Women dig wild tubers, gather baobab fruit, and berries. Camps usually have about 30 people and move about every month or so in response to the availability of water and berries and a variety of other reasons, such as a death.

The Hadza are very egalitarian and have no political structure, indeed they have no specialists of any sort (Woodburn, 1979). There is a slightly greater respect afforded to older people but not very marked compared to that in other East African societies. One manifestation of this respect is the fact that camps are usually referred to by the name of some senior man, usually in his 50s or 60s. The core of a camp, however, tends to be a group of sisters, one of whom the man has long been married to. There is no higher level of organization than the camp and people move into and out of camps with ease. Post-marital residence is best described as multi-local. Of those marriages where one spouse had parents living in the same camp, in about 60% it was the wife, 40% the husband (Woodburn, 1968).

There are no clans, or unilineal kin groups of any kind. Descent is traced bilaterally with overlapping kin ties so that any Hadza can usually decipher some kin connection to any other. Generation and gender are distinguished. For example, gender is distinguished among grandparents but matrilineal and patrilineal grandparents are not distinguished (though a suffix can be added to distinguish them). Cousins are distinguished by gender but matrilineal and patrilineal are not distinguished, nor are parallel distinguished from cross-cousins. The term for a female cousin is the same as for sister and male cousin the same as brother, though in both cases, they can be distinguished from siblings with a prefix. A distinction is made between maternal and paternal aunts and uncles. Father's brother is called by the same term as father, which may be related to the fairly common practice of the levirate in which a man marries his dead brother's widow. Mother's brother is called by a different term than father. Maternal and paternal aunts on the other hand, are both called by the same term as mother. When personal names are used, there is only a given name. In recent times, when asked to give a surname by government officials, missionaries, or researchers, Hadza use the first name of the father as the child's second name.

There is no organized religion and no belief in an afterlife. There is a cosmology with the sun and moon in the role of mother and father of all the stars. There is a creation myth that explains how people came to be, and how there came to be different tribes. Religious symbolism is associated with epeme meat (the heart, kidney, back, and genitals) of larger game animals. There is a ritual epeme dance performed at night. Men perform one at a time, stomping and singing and whistling to the women who sit and return their calls. The man attempts to rouse the women into getting up and twirling around him. There must be no moonlight, nor firelight, but must be pitch dark. The women try to guess who the man is through the call and shout interchange and his anonymity allows them to interact with him in a way they would not otherwise do, suggesting sexual overtones.

There are several different neighboring tribes of farmers and herders, the Nilotic-speaking Datoga and Maasai, the Cushitic-speaking Iraqw, the Bantu-speaking Isanzu, Iramba, and Sukuma. Since Hadzane is in a completely separate linguistic phylum, this means there are four different language phyla represented, which is a high degree of linguistic diversity for such a small area. Some of these neighboring tribes have been in the area for a long time, the longest being the Iraqw, who moved down from Ethiopia 2,000–3,000 years ago. Relations between the Hadza and their neighbors are somewhat hostile but do involve some trading. For example, the Hadza give the Datoga honey which is made into beer and the Hadza in return get some beer or meat. The Hadza also trade meat and snakebite medicine for iron, cloth, and food. The Hadza resent the encroachment of the pastoralists, especially during the dry season when their herds can drink up all the water and eat up the plants needed to support the wildlife the Hadza hunt. In days past, Hadza would occasionally hunt a cow belonging to the pastoralists but if caught, would be hunted down and killed by a posse of pastoralists. When the first European explorers traveled in Hadza country, the Hadza would hide, which was probably their response to many outsiders (Marlowe, 2002b). Obst, the first person to write about the Hadza who actually met them, was told that around the turn of the 19th century the Maasai would hunt and kill Hadza (Obst, 1912).

There is no written Hadza language and until very recently few Hadza had had any schooling. Today, about half of the Hadza have been to school for a year or two. Only some of those who have attended school know their ages so we have to guess at their ages. In the late 1950s, James Woodburn collected genealogies, in the 70s, Lars Smith began collecting demographic data and this was continued from 1982 on by Nicholas Blurton Jones (Blurton-Jones et al., 1992). Thus, for those who were born from the early 60s or 70s, we know their ages well. In the late 1960s a team of researchers did an anthropometric study including measurement of color blindness, blood pressure, cholesterol, levels of certain diseases, among other things (Barnicot, Bennett, & Woodburn, 1972; Barnicot & Woodburn, 1975). Only recently has any genetic research been conducted and results are yet to be published.

# **THE CONTEXT OF HEALTH: ENVIRONMENTAL, ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND POLITICAL FACTORS**

The most important fact about Hadza health is that they are hunter–gatherers who live wholly outside during the half of the year when it is dry and only sleep in minimal grass huts during the rainy season. They occupy an area of about 2,500 km<sup>2</sup> at a population density of about 0.24/km<sup>2</sup> (Blurton-Jones et al., 1992). They live in camps that average 29 individuals and move about 10 times per year, though the number of moves is slightly decreasing these days (Marlowe, 2002b). Because they live in the open at low densities and move frequently, they are less vulnerable to many of the contagious diseases that spread among their farming and herding neighbors, who live indoors. In 1964, soon after independence, most Hadza were rounded up by the army and forced to settle at Yaeda Chini where a school and clinic were built in order to settle and modernize them. Within a few months however, many Hadza caught contagious diseases and many died with, "respiratory and diarrheal infections" (McDowell, 1981, p. 7). This caused the Hadza to return to the bush. Today, there are no Hadza children in that school and the clinic is used mostly by the other ethnic groups who were attracted to Yaeda Chini by the school and clinic.

The Hadza have a much less monotonous diet than their agricultural neighbors, who eat maize or rice almost every day with only the occasional bit of meat. The Hadza eat a variety of berries, tubers, honey, baobab fruit, and a wide variety of game from birds to mammals. Of course, there is more fluctuation in the quantity of food consumed by the Hadza than among their agricultural neighbors. However, while the Hadza are often hungry, they do not recall any Hadza ever starving to death. When some big game animal is killed, they gorge themselves for days. During the berry season however, they may sometimes eat almost nothing but one type of berry for 2 months. A variety of wild tubers, three species in particular, are the staple of the diet since they can be found all year round. Medium-sized to large game is shared pretty equally among all those in an average size camp and this sharing helps minimize the variance in daily consumption. There is probably less equitable sharing of other types of food but still some sharing occurs, which also minimizes variation in daily consumption and variation in the amount consumed by each household. This extensive

#### **The Context of Health 691**

sharing of food that is taken back to a central place, which is typical of foraging populations, must have had a significant impact on human life history since it subsidizes young even after weaning. However, children begin foraging for themselves quite early and by age 10 acquire about half their own needs (Blurton-Jones, Hawkes, & O'Connell, 1989).

Even though the Hadza are sometimes spared epidemics that hit their neighbors, they have an appreciable infant and juvenile mortality rate. Infant mortality in the first year is 21%, and juvenile mortality by age 15 is 46% (Blurton-Jones et al., 1992), both of which are close to the mean for foraging populations (Marlowe, 2001). By the time women have completed their child-bearing years, they have given birth to an average of 6.2 children (also about the mean Total Fertility Rate for foragers). The total population of Hadza is slightly increasing, perhaps partly because it is rebounding from past declines caused for example by the Maasai expansion in the late 1800s, and the deaths during the 1960s settlement attempt (Blurton-Jones et al., 1992). The life expectancy at birth is about 31 years but this is greatly driven by the infant mortality rate, and does not mean there are few old Hadza around. A woman who survives to age 45 has a life expectancy of about 21 more years (Blurton-Jones, Hawkes, & O'Connell, 2002). The mean inter-birth interval regardless of whether children live or die is about 3.4 years.

The overall sex ratio is very close to equal, as is the operational sex ratio (OSR), the ratio of reproductiveaged men to reproductive-aged women. The sex ratio of those under 5 however, is quite skewed toward males, who die at a higher rate. This is despite the fact that male infants nurse at a higher frequency than females. Fathers spend more time holding and interacting with male infants and toddlers but this is almost balanced by mothers spending slightly more time with female children, so that overall care received by children is not significantly different for males or females (Marlowe, 2002a).

Adult male weight was 53.1 kg in the late 1960s and 46 kg for adult females (Barnicot et al., 1972). In 2000, I found male weight had not changed (53.6 kg), but female weight had increased slightly to 47.2 kg. Height was 1.625 m for adult males and 1.513 m for adult females, up from 148.6 cm in the late 60s. I found the percent of body fat was 20.4% for adult females and 11% for adult males. Body Mass Index (BMI) is 20.2 for adult males and 20.6 for adult females. These statistics show that the Hadza are not malnourished, and in fact are in quite good shape for a subsistence population, with men having plenty of muscle and women plenty of fat.

Despite being in good health generally, the Hadza have a hard life and many have had broken bones or serious wounds. This is evident in their fluctuating asymmetry (FA). FA is a measure of the deviation from perfect symmetry in bilaterally symmetrical traits, which is assumed to reflect the degree of environmental stress experienced by organisms. Measuring 10 body traits, Hadza FA is significantly greater than FA in the U.S. (Gray & Marlowe, 2002). The Hadza sleep on the ground on an Impala skin, with little covering, sometimes a thin shawl to keep off the cold before dawn. Both men and women get lots of exercise since women go foraging about 4 hr a day and men about 6 hr. While foraging, women dig with sticks in hard ground to get under big boulders, which is very tough work. Men often use axes, they make, to chop into trees and get the honey in bee hives, which is jarring to the body.

The Hadza smoke as much tobacco as they can get their hands on (women chew it), but it seems their vigorous activity keeps them from suffering from emphysema because they are not short of breath compared to non-Hadza who try to keep up with them when walking. They have been making stone pipes for many centuries, suggesting that they have been able to get tobacco through some trading with others for a long time, and probably marijuana or another plant before that (Fosbrooke, 1956; Sutton, 1990). The Hadza also drink as much alcohol as they can get, which is very little. They do not make alcohol themselves but trade honey to their agro-pastoralist neighbors who use it to make beer and give them some in return.

Normally, the Hadza receive little or no standard medical treatment. When injuries occur or someone is seriously ill, unless someone like a researcher is around to dispense medicine or take them to the nearest clinic or hospital, they simply endure (though they do have certain medical practices as described below). There is one hospital, which is quite good by Tanzanian standards, only a day's walk from part of Hadza country but since it is still a long walk up steep hills, few Hadza are treated there. There are three small clinics with very limited facilities and medicines a bit closer but unless someone pays for them, Hadza are rarely treated. For the most part, the Hadza continue to exhibit natural mortality and morbidity, only slightly influenced by medical attention. Due to their foraging lifestyle however, they have extremely good eyesight, hearing, teeth, no obesity, and apparently little cancer.

## **MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS**

With the exception of the few older women who know how to perform a clitoridectomy, there are no medical specialists or specialists of any kind among the Hadza. Every adult knows about the various medicinal plants and practices that the Hadza use. Any adult present may treat someone with an ailment. Women often sit and groom children, removing lice, washing them, and blowing their noses. When anyone is injured and cannot forage for a while, their close kin usually attend to them and bring food back for them until they recover.

# **CLASSIFICATION OF ILLNESS, THEORIES OF ILLNESS, AND TREATMENT OF ILLNESS**

Illnesses and causes of death tend to be explained in four ways. (1) If someone falls to their death, the Hadza say the cause of death is simply an accident. (2) If someone is killed by a lion or a snakebite, this is just part of the dangers of the natural world. Likewise, malaria is understood to be caused by mosquito bites and sleeping sickness (African trypanosomiasis) the bite of the tsetse fly. (3) When the cause is less obvious however, and especially when death is sudden, a heart attack or poisoning, and the person had been healthy before, then the witchcraft of their non-Hadza neighbors is often said to be the cause of death. The Hadza do not themselves practice witchcraft but fear that of their neighbors. Even when a death is clearly caused by some disease, the Hadza may say this was due to witchcraft if that person had had some quarrel with someone earlier. The percentage of deaths attributed to such witchcraft is on the rise, and these days even a few Hadza are suspected of having learned witchcraft from their neighbors. (4) Finally, there is the supernatural cause not involving witchcraft. There are few rules or taboos in Hadza society, but one such taboo relates to the eating of the epeme meat. Only the adult epeme men can eat these parts of larger game (heart, kidneys, genitals, and back). Sub-adult males and all females cannot eat this meat nor can they even see the men eat it. If they do, it is said they can get ill or die.

There are several types of medical treatment (Woodburn, 1959). For example, there is a certain type of plant that is boiled and then drunk to relieve the symptoms of malaria. Several plants are used to cause one to vomit after being bitten by a poisonous snake. With the most poisonous snakes, there is little hope since they can kill a person in a minute or seconds, but these plants can apparently work with less poisonous but still deadly snakes, as many people say they have been saved this way. Bark from a certain tree is boiled and consumed like tea to treat syphilis and gonorrhea. A certain plant is given to someone who falls down with a seizure, presumably epilepsy, which must be rare, given that there are only 1,000 Hadza. Some say there are plants that can induce miscarriage in the early stages of pregnancy, though it seems they are rarely used, or that they are ineffective, since women sometimes complain that they just keep having babies and cannot stop. There is also a plant that is supposed to help men overcome impotence.

When one has general pain in the body, a horn is used to create suction to suck "the poison" out. A knife is also used to make cuts and let blood run for general pain. Some Hadza have several scars on their arms and backs as a result. When one is badly cut, a tourniquet is applied after boiled animal fat or honey is applied to the wound. The Hadza do not like to wear bandages and believe it is better to let wounds have fresh air, which is probably true most of the time, but they also have a problem keeping wounds clean and free of infection since hygiene is unavoidably poor.

## **SEXUALITY AND REPRODUCTION**

Boys and girls begin playing house around the age of 6 or 7 and probably begin having sex for real in their mid teens. First marriages follow courtship that is carried on clandestinely and if the couple like each other enough, they begin living together, hopefully with parents' approval though it is not required. Because a man might kill his wife if he catches her having an affair, female marital infidelity is probably fairly rare, though many marriages end when the husband is away for so long (usually pursuing another woman) that his wife begins an open relationship with another man, saying that her husband has left her. Most extramarital sex occurs between a married man and a single woman. Polygyny is rare and polyandry, at least of an overt kind, does not exist. Serial monogamy is the rule. Apparently syphilis and gonorrhea have been present for some time since the Hadza have a treatment which they say cures it. So far there have been few cases of AIDS, even though the frequency is high throughout Tanzania.

#### **Health through the Life Cycle 693**

Men sometimes experience impotence, and try to treat it with a plant. Infertile women feel sad about not having any children and others feel sorry for her. On the occasions when men admit to having left their wife (they usually say they were left by her) they most often say the reason is that she bore no children. There appears to be no ideal family size. Women sometimes say they wish they could stop having babies. Men seem to think more is better but both men and women think having no children is not good.

## **HEALTH THROUGH THE LIFE CYCLE**

### **Pregnancy and Birth**

The Hadza understand much about conception. A Hadza woman will wash on the last day of her period and then the couple has sex. They think that if she gets pregnant, it is on that first day after her period, though whether she does they would not know until she misses her period a month later. Young women, up until their early 30s perhaps, often carry around a thin, 2–3 foot long stick with designs carved by their husbands, which they say is a fertility stick that will make them get pregnant.

Women give birth at home, squatting. They are attended by their mothers, sisters, and/or friends, or their husband if there is no other woman to help. The attendant cleans the baby and cuts and ties the umbilical chord. Women apparently die at fairly high rates from giving birth, given that I was able to elicit the names of several women who had died in childbirth from many different men and women. Men say women are clitoridectomized because if they were not, the baby would have trouble coming out, since the opening would be obstructed by the protruding clitoris.

There is no evidence of infanticide and the Hadza say only in the case of severe deformity, might a baby be killed. Even when twins are born, they do not kill or neglect one, though the risk is higher that one will die since it is difficult to rear two at the same time. Even though some women say they know of ways to induce miscarriage, those same women complain of not being able to stop having babies, so these methods are either ineffective, or they do not really want to use them.

### **Infancy**

Infants are carried at almost all times during the first 6 months of life and nurse on demand. Women carry infants on their back wrapped in a skin, or in these days a shawl. When the baby cries, they swing it around to the front or side so that the infant can nurse while the mother continues her work. Infants are carried on their mother's back when she goes foraging and can sleep right through the vigorous movements of digging for tubers. Children are usually completely weaned by 3 and nurse at low frequency by age 2 years (Marlowe, n.d.). Mothers chew some weaning foods before giving them to the infant. Most mortality occurs in the first year of life. These deaths are apparently due to various respiratory and diarrheal infections, malaria, and at a later age measles, over

### **Childhood**

which parents have little influence.

By age 3, children have small slits made on their cheeks by their mother, uncle, or grandparent, which leaves them with small scars to identify them as Hadza. Toddlers are not easy to take foraging because they are too young to walk very far and too old and heavy to carry. They are therefore, usually left in camp and that means someone must be in camp to watch them. This can be almost anyone, but is often a grandmother, and during the dry season when men hunt at night, it is often the father who is dozing in camp all day. Men interact most with their young children when they are 1–3 or 4 years of age (Marlowe, 2002a).

There is very little disciplining among the Hadza. When children are in their "terrible two's" and throw violent tantrums, they pick up sticks and beat adults, who merely fend off the blows, rather than take the stick away. Children tend to learn how to behave from older children because when a 2-year-old hits a 4-year-old, the 4-year-old does take revenge. The most disciplining adults do is to simply make a noise of displeasure. Their leniency extends to letting young children play with whatever they want. A baby can often be seen with a sharp knife or other dangerous object in its mouth with adults not bothering to take it away. Nor do they try to keep little ones out of the fire. Children get burned or get cut and learn on their own. By the standards of modern America therefore, Hadza adults would appear to be guilty of child neglect, if not abuse. Actually Hadza parents are very loving and very rarely hit or abuse their children, and children never feel unloved. They grow up to be extremely well-behaved by the age of 4, without parental disciplining. They do not disobey their parents, nor argue with them, and by 4 or 5 will wait on adults or run errands often without even being asked.

Boys usually get their first bow when they are about 4 and spend hours each day in target practice. By the time they are 7 or 8 they are already very good and kill small birds and rodents. Girls begin accompanying their mothers on foraging forays by around 8–10 and also look after their younger siblings.

### Adolescence

By age  $10-12$ , boys and girls may begin having some sex but only begin courting when girls are about 15 or 16 and boys 17 or 18. There is no disapproval of premarital sex but it is kept secret anyway. There is no public display of affection even between married couples. Age at menarche is about 16 or 17. At this time, or close to it, there is a puberty ritual for girls attended only by females, called Mai-to-ko, during which the tip of the clitoris is cut off with a knife by one of the few older women who know how to perform this. The Hadza may have acquired this practice from their neighbors, the Iraqw, Datoga, or Maasai, since all clitoridectomize women, though several Hadza claim it is not a borrowed custom. Males are not circumcised and there is no puberty ritual for boys. There is a ritual eating of the epeme meat when a teenager has killed his first big animal.

By the age of 10, girls are not only supplying about half their own food needs but bringing food back to share with others. They also tend younger siblings and other children much of the time. Boys by the age of 10 or 12 go hunting in groups of 2 or 3 and kill birds and small mammals. There is also no generation gap. Teenagers look up to adults and get along well with the elders. This is at least partly due to the fact that adults do not try to control them and rarely express a strong opinion about whom they should marry. The fact that there is little polygyny means the young males are not in such intense competition for females as they are in many cultures. In addition, since there is no wealth, men do not have the same kind of leverage over their sons as they do in societies where inheritance is important (Marlowe, 2003).

### Adulthood

Age at first marriage for females is about 17-18 and median age at first reproduction is 19 (Nicholas Blurton-Jones, personal communication). Age at first marriage for men is around 20. Marriage is not arranged and there is no ceremony, it consists of a couple that has been secretly

courting for a while, beginning to live together. Men are expected to kill a large animal to become epeme men and eat epeme meat with the other men. This often happens when a male reaches about 18 or 19. Even men who have not killed such an animal, however, would be considered epeme men after reaching the age of 25 or 30. Men feel the need to bring in enough meat to keep their mother-inlaw from counseling her daughter to look for someone better.

There is a fairly high rate of divorce, especially in the early years of a marriage (Blurton-Jones, Marlowe, Hawkes, & O'Connell, 2000). Divorce consists of a couple simply ceasing to live together. Because women usually have their kin around them, there is not a heavy price to pay for being divorced. While a child has increased risk of mortality if its mother dies, there is no evidence of increased child mortality resulting from a child not having its father present (Blurton-Jones et al., 2000). There is also little or no stigma associated with out-of-wedlock births. Normally, there is little domestic abuse, though a man may sometimes hit his wife and be forgiven by others if there is considered to be good cause (infidelity or laziness). However, wife beating is now on the rise (see changing patterns below).

Being a natural fertility population with frequent nursing, strenuous exercise, and mere subsistence level intake of calories, women do not cycle frequently. They probably have less than  $\frac{1}{4}$  of the number of menses of American women, perhaps 80 in a lifetime. When they finally reach menopause, they are usually nursing a child and are not sure whether they will resume cycling or not. This may mean they experience fewer side-effects, such as hot flashes, upon reaching menopause, since none of these symptoms has been reported. No cancer has been observed among the Hadza but with such a small population it would be difficult to know whether it exists. A similar absence among other foragers as well has led some to speculate that reproductive cancers may be absent in natural fertility forager populations (Boyd Eaton et al., 1994).

### The Aged

Even though the life expectancy at birth is only  $31.5$ years, there are plenty of very old Hadza. A person who makes it to age 18 is likely to live to be 60 and one who makes it to 45 is likely to live to be 66. Most women over 60 are single, either because their husband has died or left them for a younger woman. These women usually

#### **References 695**

live with one or more of their daughters and tend their grandchildren. They certainly do not feel alienated, no Hadza does, and they are an integral part of the camp and family life, but they express bitterness over the fact that men leave them once they get too old. Old men are shown extra respect until they reach the age of perhaps 70 or 75, when their status drops a bit. Old men are the most likely to fall out of tall baobab trees and to their deaths since they continue to try to collect honey into old age. They are somewhat grudgingly fed and are expected to watch children in camp when they are not out foraging.

### **Dying and Death**

The Hadza leave corpses out for hyenas to eat, or if the deceased is an older person, they may push his or her hut down on top of them and set it ablaze, then move away (Woodburn, 1982). Increasingly, they are under some pressure from the government to bury dead. There is no belief in an afterlife. While most Hadza say they have never heard of anyone committing suicide, there are two recent cases of people attempting to hang themselves. One was a man whose wife left him for another man, another a woman who thought her husband was pursuing other women. In both cases the rope broke and they fell from the tree.

Common illnesses and injuries include: scabies, backache, malaria, eye infections from hearth smoke, broken bones, and wounds from accidents. Causes of death include tuberculosis, malaria when young, sleeping sickness, viral diarrhea, falling from baobab trees when collecting honey, murder by another Hadza, snakebite, and being charged by a buffalo after hitting them with an arrow. Hadza often scavenge meat from the kills made by lions, leopards, and hyenas and this sometimes gets them killed by one of these predators. Finally, childbirth apparently results in the death of the child and the mother at a fairly high rate.

## **CHANGING HEALTH PATTERNS**

The Hadza habitat is being damaged by their pastoralist neighbors' overgrazing and their horticultural neighbors' felling of trees for firewood and planting of crops. They have almost lost the best spot with a large underground spring to the burgeoning number of villagers. More Hadza are attending school where a steady, if monotonous diet, means they grow faster and larger and more are becoming literate. However, future development and a more sedentary existence will probably prove deleterious. While the consumption of tobacco might pose the greater direct threat to health, the ramifications of drinking are much more severe. Promiscuous sex near the village is bound to result in sexually transmitted diseases and death from AIDS. In the village, begging and money from tourists (for whom they perform a song and dance) leads to drunkenness and quasi-prostitution, injuries from fights, and murder. Murder is becoming more common, mainly as a result of increasing alcohol consumption. Other Hadza do not approve of a man beating his wife and will reluctantly intervene to stop it, but when drunk, men may seriously injure or kill their wives with little or no provocation before anyone can prevent it.

## **REFERENCES**

- Barnicot, N. A., Bennett, F. J., & Woodburn, J. C. (1972). Blood pressure and serum cholesterol in the Hadza of Tanzania. *Human Biology, 44*.
- Barnicot, N. A., & Woodburn, J. C. (1975). Colour-blindness and sensitivity to PTC in Hadza. *Annals of Human Biology, 2*.
- Blurton-Jones, N., Hawkes, K., & O'Connell, J. (2002). Antiquity of postreproductive life: Are there modern impacts on hunter-gatherer postreproductive life spans? *American Journal of Human Biology, 14*(2), 184–205.
- Blurton-Jones, N., Hawkes, K., & O'Connell, J. (1989). Modelling and measuring costs of children in two foraging societies. In V. Standen & R. Foley (Eds.), *Comparative socioecology: The behavioural ecology of humans and other mammals* (pp. 367–390). London: Basil Blackwell.
- Blurton-Jones, N., Marlowe, F., Hawkes, K., & O'Connell, J. (2000). Paternal investment and hunter-gatherer divorce rates. In L. Cronk, N. Chagnon, & W. Irons (Eds.), *Adaptation and human behavior: An anthropological perspective* (pp. 69–90). New York: Elsevier.
- Blurton-Jones, N., O'Connell, J., Hawkes, K., Kamuzora, C. L., & Smith, L. C. (1992). Demography of the Hadza, an increasing and high density population of savanna foragers. *American Journal of Physical Anthropology, 89*, 159–181.
- Boyd Eaton, S., Pike, M. C., Short, R. V., Lee, N. C., Trussell, J., Hatcher, R. A., et al. (1994). Women's reproductive cancers in evolutionary context. *Quarterly Review of Biology, 69*, 353–367.
- Fosbrooke, H. A. (1956). A stone age tribe in Tanganyika. *The South African Archeological Bulletin, 11*(41), 3–8.
- Gray, P., & Marlowe, F. (2002). Fluctuating asymmetry of a foraging population: The Hadza of Tanzania. *Annals of Human Biology, 29*(5), 495–501.
- Marlowe, F. (2001). Male contribution to diet and female reproductive success among foragers. *Current Anthropology, 42*(5), 755–760.
- Marlowe, F. (n.d.). *Who tends Hadza children?* In B. Hewlett & M. Lamb (Eds.), Culture and ecology of Hunter-Gatherer children.