# **LIFE AND PERSONAL LIBERTY**

# ANUP SURENDRANATH\*

#### **I. INTRODUCTION**

THE cases that invoke the 'right to life and personal liberty' in Article 21 are far too many to confidently build a grand narrative around it. It has been expanded in such numerous directions in so many different ways that it becomes difficult to discern any level of normative coherence. The attempt in this chapter is to achieve a balance between coverage and developing an analytical critique of the manner in which the content of the 'right to life and personal liberty' has been developed. In circumstances of difficult political, social, and economic questions, the reasonableness standard has resulted in dilution of rights protection under Article 21. At the same time, however, we see repeated references to 'dignity' and 'life beyond animal existence' being used to radically redefine the scope of rights protection under Article 21. Given that the extent of the protection under Article 21 now extends from the prohibition against torture to the right to sleep, a discussion on the hierarchy of rights seems inevitable. Further, the chapter in various sections also examines the inconsistent use of dignity and the 'life-is-more-than-animal-existence' framework to read in penumbral rights.

The chapter adopts two broad approaches. The first is to distil the normative concerns about the content of rights, method of recognition of rights, and protection of rights from landmark cases. Secondly, in the parts that deal with specific rights, the attempt has been to buttress the arguments on the lack of normative coherence, while at the same time to provide an internal critique about the inadequacies relating to the content of those rights.

In Section II, the various aspects of Article 21 that were considered in *AK Gopalan* are discussed. The section also demonstrates that the solution arising out of *Maneka*, while addressing the issue of the test to be adopted under 'procedure established by law', leaves quite a few questions unanswered about the content of Article 21.

In Sections III and IV, the strategies adopted by the Supreme Court (SC) to expand the scope of the 'right to life and personal liberty' are analysed, with particular emphasis on the Court's surprising and repeated emphasis on a particular extract from *Munn v Illinois*, along with its use of dignity. Sections V, VI, and VII contain an examination of the manner in which specific rights claims were recognised or not, while also engaging with the content of these rights. Section VIII brings together the various discussions and argues for the need to discuss hierarchy of rights and critically re-evaluate the significance of *Maneka* in contemporary constitutional jurisprudence on Article 21.

## **II. FROM GOPALAN TO MANEKA—UNRESOLVED ISSUES**

Every discussion on the content of the right to life and personal liberty inevitably takes us back to *Gopalan*<sup> $1$ </sup> because it was in that case that the SC, despite being primarily concerned with Article 22,

made its first moves on the scope of Articles 19 and 21. The critical question in *Gopalan* was whether a particular freedom (in this instance the preventive detention law) could fall under both Articles 19 and 21, for this would determine the applicable standard of review.

*Gopalan* is often taken to have only held that any particular freedom cannot fall under both Articles 19 and 21. However, such a reading misses out nuances that appear on a close reading of the opinions in *Gopalan*. Of the six judges in *Gopalan*, only Fazl Ali J held that an overlap of Articles 19 and 21 was possible.<sup>2</sup> For him, a preventive detention law had to not only satisfy the requirements of Article 21 but additionally that of freedom of movement in Article 19(1)(d) and 19(5) because Articles 19– 22 did not form independent codes in themselves.

However, the five other judges in *Gopalan* held that Articles 19 and 21 occupy exclusive domains, with no overlap whatsoever. Apart from the fact that Article 19 is available to all citizens and Article 21 to all persons, the text indicates more restrictions on the State under Article 19. Reading freedoms as overlapping between Articles 19 and 21 would result in the alleged infringement being tested against the provisions of Article 19 as well. However, the majority position in *Gopalan* would require a particular freedom to be located either in Article 19 or 21.

There was significant discussion in *Gopalan* on the substance of the protection in Article 21 under the term 'personal liberty' and its relation with Article 19 freedoms. Despite being subsequently overruled, the opinions on the fields occupied by Articles 19 and 21 in *Gopalan* raise important questions for subsequent constitutional discussions on the content and protection under Article 21.

Amongst the majority, Sastri and Mukherjea JJ view Article 21 as being limited to issues of bodily restraint and coerced detention, while Kania J takes a much broader view to include the rights to work, sleep, play, etc.<sup>3</sup> However, Das J envisages a hierarchy of rights between the bodily freedom of a person and other auxiliary rights. Even within the auxiliary rights, Das J saw the Article 19 freedoms as occupying a higher position and therefore having received specific mention in the Constitution.

The above discussion is important because it highlights a conceptual difficulty that has been largely ignored since *Gopalan*, namely the difference in treatment that must be accorded to the different freedoms that form part of Articles 19 and 21. Article 19 gives a clear framework for the protection of freedoms mentioned therein for citizens, but the development of Article 21 jurisprudence so far leaves us with the rather problematic choice to protect the right against torture in the same manner and intensity with which we would protect the freedom of dietary preferences.

The SC in *RC* Cooper<sup>4</sup> made an important contribution in finally achieving the reversal of the majority position in *Gopalan* that Articles 19 and 21 occupy different and exclusive fields. In *RC Cooper* it was held (in the context of right to property under Articles 19(1)(f) and 31) that the freedoms and rights in **Part III** could be addressed by more than one provision.<sup>5</sup> Using this move made by an eleven-judge bench, the transformation in the Articles 19–21 debate was completed in *Maneka Gandhi*. 6

The seven-judge bench in *Maneka*, though primarily concerned with the meaning of 'procedure established by law', had to necessarily address the relationship between the substantive protections of Articles 19 and 21. *Maneka* was explicit that there existed certain freedoms that fell within both Articles 19 and 21, and for such freedoms the State would have to satisfy the burdens envisaged in both provisions, along with satisfying the non-arbitrariness requirement of Article 14.

Therefore, the following scheme appears after *Maneka:*

1. Freedoms that fall under both Articles 19 and 21: the Article 19 reasonableness test and the requirements of Article 21 would have to be satisfied, along with the Article 14 nonarbitrariness test.

2. Freedoms that fall only within Article 21: the Article 14 non-arbitrariness test along with the requirements of Article 21 would have to be satisfied.

*Maneka*'s attempts to resolve issues in one area has left many others unresolved. *Maneka* has no reply to the issue of whether the primary and foundational rights under Article 21 must be protected in the same manner as auxiliary rights. Further, even within Article 21, the spectrum of freedoms contained within the provision raises similar questions. For example, the protection against torture under Article 21 is only subject to the non-arbitrariness test under Article 14, which imposes a very low burden. Moreover, there is arguably no clear basis for the conflation of the rights within Articles 14, 19, and 21.<sup>7</sup> As at least one author notes, this integrated reading of the Articles renders emergency provisions providing for suspension of Article 19 freedoms (among others) useless, and to that extent is inconsistent within the constitutional framework. $\frac{8}{3}$ 

Both *Gopalan* and *Maneka* get parts of the puzzle correct, while leaving other parts with no clear resolution. *Gopalan* is correct to the extent that it recognises that certain Articles 19 and 21 freedoms attract different levels of protection, but its weakness lies in holding that the 'right to life and personal liberty' is to be protected to a lesser degree than Article 19 freedoms. *Maneka*, on the other hand, raises the level of protection for the freedoms contained within 'right to life and personal liberty' but ends up homogenising the level of protection for all freedoms. In this levelling of freedoms, *Maneka* has ensured that it is quite convenient and easy for the State to discharge its burden in restricting even the most foundational of freedoms contained in Article 21. This nearhomogeneous treatment of freedoms in Articles 19 and 21 leads to difficult constitutional dilemmas that will be explored in the following sections of this chapter.

#### **III. THE BASIS FOR EXPANDING THE MEANING OF 'PERSONAL LIBERTY'**

Apart from the relationship between Articles 19 and 21, the critical question raised during the Emergency was whether there existed a natural law right to life and personal liberty in natural law after **Part III** was suspended (Articles 352 and 359 as it stood then). Deciding the case in a pre-*Maneka* context, four judges in *ADM Jabalpur v Shivakant Shukla* took the position that there existed no right to life and personal liberty beyond Article 21 and that the State's suspension of **Part III** was constitutionally valid.<sup>2</sup> This majority judgment of the five-judge bench was delivered in the context of widespread State excesses, including forced disappearances and illegal detention. Khanna J's muchcelebrated dissent took the position that even though Article 21 might have been validly suspended, it did not mean that the petitioners could not challenge the exercise of that power.

The first couple of decades of the Court's adjudication on Article 21 involved issues of detention, arrest, and restrictions on movement wherein the SC began to seriously address the issue of rights beyond the literal meaning of Article 21, in both the contexts of 'personal liberty' and 'right to life'. The possibility of expanding the protection available under 'personal liberty' was explored in *Kharak Singh*,  $\frac{10}{10}$  strengthened in *Gobind*,  $\frac{11}{10}$  and given the widest reading in *Maneka*. As far as the expansion of the 'right to life' under Article 21 is concerned, a significant part of the judicial discourse relies on the dignity-based conception of the right in *Francis Coralie Mullin*. 12

The protection and expansion of 'personal liberty' received significant support in *Kharak Singh*. Adjudicating the validity of surveillance measures, the Court upheld the right to be in one's house without unjustified interference by the State. It invoked 'common law rights of man' to hold that 'every man's house is his castle'.<sup>13</sup> Building on this property notion, the Court held that domiciliary visits by a police official were violative of Article 21. The majority opinion relied heavily on the aspect of 'dignity' used in the preamble to bring in the expanded reading of Article  $21.\frac{14}{11}$  Though the majority made no explicit reference to the right to privacy (unlike Subba Rao J's dissent) it nonetheless began the process of expanding Article 21 beyond the limited issues of arrest and detention as far as 'personal liberty' was concerned. The expansionist mode of the Court is evident in its characterisation of Article 21 as the residuary of *all* personal liberties not covered by Article 19(1).

With the recognition of the right to privacy as a fundamental right in *Gobind*, the idea of penumbral rights under Article 21 seems to have been established. It would be difficult to argue, from a textual reading of the provision, that the right to privacy is an obvious component of Article 21. However, this expansion of 'personal liberty' was based essentially on a broad and vague understanding of the 'right to life'. In *Kharak Singh*, Ayyangar J based his wider reading of 'personal liberty' on a wide definition given to life in *Munn v Illinois*<sup>15</sup> as being something 'more than mere animal existence'. <sup>16</sup> Curiously (and it goes on to become symptomatic of the SC's use of foreign sources), there is hardly any context provided to this excerpt. *Munn* has hardly anything to do with the right to life and the phrase was never meant to delineate the precise meaning of that right. It is surprising that in many ways it went on to represent a judicial standard that determined the content of 'right to life and personal liberty' under Article 21.

In *Kharak Singh,* the argument was that if 'life' could be construed widely, then the same approach was to be adopted for 'personal liberty' and include all safeguards necessary to protect the dignity of the individual. <sup>17</sup> This might well be due to the fact that *Kharak Singh* and *Gobind* are based on the premise that Article 21 is a residuary provision for all personal liberties. A subtle shift on this issue can be seen from a comparison with *Gopalan*, where the Court viewed Article 21 as a provision that encompassed certain rights out of which Article 19 freedoms were carved out.

*Maneka* throws further light on unenumerated rights and attempts to provide a framework (albeit in the context of Article 19). The test developed in *Maneka* is whether the right claimed is an integral part or of the same nature as the named right. Further, these rights need to be 'in reality and substance nothing but an instance of the exercise of the named fundamental right'.<sup>18</sup> There was no further guidance available to determine whether a rights claim would fall under a fundamental rights provision.

# **IV. USING DIGNITYTO EXPAND THE 'RIGHT TO LIFE' AND 'PERSONAL LIBERTY'**

In *Francis Coralie Mullin*,<sup>19</sup> the Court used the extract from *Munn* to establish a dignity-based conception of the 'right to life'. Holding that the 'right to life' went beyond protection of limbs and faculties, the Court included in it the 'right to live with human dignity'. Without providing any

normative framework for the application of human dignity, the Court provided an inclusive list that comprised dignity—for example, adequate nutrition; clothing, shelter and facilities; expressing oneself; etc.<sup>20</sup> This dignity-based conception was subsequently used in cases such as the *Asiad* case, <sup>21</sup> *Olga Tellis*, <sup>22</sup> *Bandhua Mukti Morcha*, <sup>23</sup> and *Mohini Jain. 24*

The right to live with dignity as part of the 'right to life' becomes a constant refrain for the Court in cases that invoke the 'right to life' but the use of dignity in cases that involve issues of personal liberty is rather confused. The SC has invoked dignity to adjudicate the constitutionality of practices like solitary confinement and bar fetters,  $\frac{25}{ }$  handcuffing of prisoners,  $\frac{26}{ }$  and custodial death and torture. <sup>27</sup> The use of dignity in *Sunil Batra* and *DK Basu* is typical of the manner in which it is invoked in personal liberty cases. The Court declares the issue at hand to be an instance of violation of dignity without ever really developing the principles indicating the instances that are likely to be considered violations of dignity.

In more recent times, the difficulty in the manner in which the SC has developed the dignity discourse has been exposed in the context of manual scavenging. With the 2013 Act replacing the 1993 Act, $\frac{28}{3}$  the SC delivered a final judgment in a public interest litigation filed by the Safai Karamchari Andolan in 2003 seeking destruction of all dry latrines.<sup>29</sup> It was unfortunate to see the SC give its approval for the 2013 Act wherein the issue of cleaning of sewers and septic tanks continues to be legal when undertaken using protective gear and cleaning devices. The 2013 Act places this issue within the framework of health and safety of the workers rather than one of dignity.

#### **V. CIVIL AND POLITICAL RIGHTS**

In this section, various instances of the SC providing content to the 'right to life and personal liberty' are analysed. Within each of these instances, it will be examined whether the Court has considered the issue under the right to 'life' or 'personal liberty'. Further, an attempt has been made to delineate the Court's basis for either accepting or rejecting a particular rights claim.

## **1. Rights of Individuals in Detention and Protection Homes**

Custodial torture and death, rights of prisoners, and sexual violence in custody are the main themes with which the Court has engaged on the rights of detainees. Although the jurisprudence of the Court has seen significant expansion in this area with reliance on dignity, no clear dignity framework has been developed.

In *Sunil Batra*, <sup>30</sup> the Court found the solitary confinement of a death row prisoner and use of bar fetters on an undertrial prisoner to be violative of the right to live with human dignity under Article 21.<sup>31</sup> Similarly, handcuffing a certain class of prisoners while being escorted to court was held to be violative of dignity and an unreasonable restriction on the freedom of movement. <sup>32</sup> Citing *Sunil Batra* and *Prem Shankar Shukla*, the Court has also declared that handcuffing and parading an accused through the streets to the police station amounted to undignified treatment. $\frac{33}{2}$ 

In the context of custodial violence the radical aspect of the Court's jurisprudence is the remedy it

has crafted for it. Through a series of decisions, the Court has now firmly crystallised the position that it can award monetary compensation as a public law remedy for such Article 21 violations.  $\frac{34}{3}$ However, the Court has not developed a principled basis for determining the categories of rights violations that are eligible for monetary compensation.

It is curious that the Court has largely been quiet on fixing accountability and the criminal prosecution of those involved in custodial torture and deaths.

In dealing with Article 21 rights of arrested persons, undertrials, prisoners, and those in protection homes, the Court has also adopted the strategy of issuing wide-ranging directions on procedure for arrest, treatment of inmates, living conditions, and access to legal aid, as typified in the *Agra Protection Home* case. 35

The Court uses this strategy in an attempt to secure the protection of Article 21 rights, but the Court has not attempted a constitutional justification of such a power. Doing so will not only ensure that the Court's powers in designing such remedies are well defined, but will also provide a basis for insisting that the Court exercise such a power when the conditions laid down are satisfied. The current manner of exercising this power to issue directions resembles political discretion more than anything else.

#### **2. Access to Justice**

Access to justice under Article 21 is largely based on reading in the content from Article 39A in the Directive Principles of State Policy (DPSPs). While there is hardly any discussion on whether access to justice is part of right to 'life' or 'personal liberty' under Article 21, the argument on offer is that not reading access to justice as part of Article 21 would violate the 'fair, just and reasonable' requirement of the 'procedure established by law'. Through acting on newspaper reports about the large number of undertrials languishing in Bihar's jails, the SC issued a series of directions in the *Hussainara Khatoon* line of cases.  $\frac{36}{10}$  In *Hussainara Khatoon* (*IV*),  $\frac{37}{10}$  the SC for the first time held that the right to free legal aid services was part of the protection afforded by Article 21 and a nonnegotiable part of the right to a fair trial.<sup>38</sup> In *Khatri (II)*,<sup>39</sup> the Court plugged a major loophole and made it mandatory for judges in lower courts to inform all accused persons that they had a right to free legal representation if they could not privately afford the services of a lawyer. In *Suk Das*, 40 the Court further clarified that it is not necessary for the accused to ask for free legal representation but it is instead the obligation of the judge to inform the accused of such a right. $\frac{41}{2}$ 

*MH Hoskot* affirmed the right to legal aid for convicts in order to help them in the appellate stages, <sup>42</sup> ruling that the burden was not on the convicted prisoner to seek legal aid inside prison, but rather that it was the obligation of the prison authorities to inform all convicted prisoners of their right to legal aid and the authorities would be required to demonstrate that they had indeed discharged their duty.

One area within access to justice that the Court has surprisingly paid scant attention to is legal aid in police custody. In *Nandini Satpathy*, <sup>43</sup> where the rights of arrested individuals were examined in detail, the Court declined to rule that an indigent person detained at a police station has the right to free legal aid. This case, along with *Sheela Barse*, <sup>44</sup> are notable instances of the Court missing an opportunity to rule on informal arrests. <sup>45</sup> While in *DK Basu* the Court did rule that a person detained

by the police had the right to consult a lawyer, the Court was quick to clarify that such a right did not extend to having a lawyer present throughout police interrogation. Even the Legal Services Authorities Act 1987 does not recognise such a statutory right, and only extends legal services to a person who has to 'file or defend a case'.<sup>46</sup>

# **3. Taking Life: The State and the Individual**

In this sub-section the SC's position on extinguishing life in two contexts is examined. The constitutional discourse on taking of life by the State through the death penalty and the attempt to commit suicide by an individual are analysed.

## a. *Death Penalty*

The first constitutional challenge to the death penalty was in *Jagmohan 47* (pre-*Maneka*) and was based on Articles 14, 19, and 21 on the grounds that: (a) the judges had arbitrary power to impose the death penalty; (b) the death penalty extinguished all freedoms under Article 19; (c) there was no procedure prescribed for sentencing to indicate when the death penalty must be chosen. The constitutional bench unanimously disagreed with these arguments, largely within the framework that the Constitution of India itself recognised the existence and validity of the death penalty. $\frac{48}{3}$  Also, the judgment in *Jagmohan* came three months after the decision in *Furman v Georgia*, <sup>49</sup> but the bench was unwilling to give it any considerable weight, citing the lack of a provision similar to the Eighth Amendment ('cruel and unusual punishment') in the Constitution of India. The majority in *Bachan Singh 50* (post-*Maneka*) operated within the same framework as *Jagmohan*, but made a crucial addition by developing the 'rarest of the rare' framework to address concerns around the arbitrary use of the death penalty. Now the Court was required to balance aggravating and mitigating circumstances relating to the criminal and the crime in the sentencing phase. However, inconsistency displayed by the SC itself on this ruling, as in *Ravji*, <sup>51</sup> which was subsequently relied on to confirm the death sentences of numerous individuals (some of whom were even executed) before the error was judicially acknowledged in *Santosh Bariyar <sup>52</sup>* and *Sangeet*, <sup>53</sup> has inexplicably kept some prisoners such as Mohan Anna Chavan and Umesh Reddy under death row despite two benches of the SC having acknowledged the error in their cases.<sup>54</sup>

The constitutionality of death by hanging was challenged in *Deena* before a three-judge bench. 55 Upholding its constitutionality, the Court declared that hanging did not amount to cruel punishment. Citing medical opinion, the Court was of the view that death by hanging causes the least pain and was a dignified manner of carrying out death sentences.<sup>56</sup>

The SC, however, has gone miles ahead of the rest of the world in terms of delay jurisprudence in the context of the death penalty. In *Shatrughan Chauhan*, 57 it ruled that undue and inordinate delay in deciding the mercy petition of death row prisoners would be a ground for commutation by itself. The concerned prisoner need not show any adverse effects s/he has suffered due to such delay and the very fact of the delay would be sufficient for commutation, as it has a dehumanising effect amounting

to torture.<sup>58</sup> While commuting the death sentence of fifteen prisoners, the Court laid down detailed guidelines concerning steps that must be taken after the rejection of mercy petitions such as a last meeting with the family, the opportunity to challenge the rejection of the mercy petition, mental health evaluations, etc. <sup>59</sup> *Shatrughan Chauhan* also overruled the decision in *Devender Pal Singh Bhullar*,<sup>60</sup> which had held that those sentenced to death for terrorist offences could not claim the benefit of inordinate delay due to the nature of their crimes.

#### b. *Attempt to Suicide*

The constitutional discussion on the attempt to suicide is important for two reasons: (i) it throws light on the nature of Article 21 and its relationship with the other fundamental rights; (ii) it highlights the concerns with the use of dignity in the absence of a framework.

The constitutionality of Sections 306 and 309 of the Indian Penal Code 1860 that criminalise the attempt to suicide and abetment of suicide was the subject matter of *P Rathinam<sup>61</sup>* and *Gian Kaur*, 62 respectively. *Gian Kaur* overruled the decision in *Rathinam* based on a different understanding of Article 21. In *Rathinam*, the Court held that what was true of other fundamental rights must be true of Article 21, and so the right to life must also include the right not to live, just as the freedom of speech included the freedom not to speak. <sup>63</sup> However, in *Gian Kaur* the constitutional bench took the view that such a construction cannot be given to Article 21 because in all other instances it is the negative aspect of the right that is invoked; that is, no action is required from the individual and the right to kill oneself would require positive actions by the individual.  $64$  The Court does not offer an explanation for this differential treatment between positive action and inaction. In *Gian Kaur*, the Court was also of the view that since dignity was used to give meaning and content to the right to life, it could not then be used to extinguish life itself.

However, the Court distinguished the right to end one's life from the choice to die a dignified death at the end of one's natural life. The right to die with dignity is available only when 'the natural process of death has commenced', but there is no right to die an unnatural death. However, this part of *Gian Kaur* was recognised as obiter in *Aruna Ramachandra Shanbaug*. <sup>65</sup> Addressing the issue of passive euthanasia in *Aruna Ramachandra Shanbaug*, the Court was of the view that in situations where the natural process of death had begun or the person was in a permanent vegetative state, it would not be a crime to passively accelerate death in these instances by refusing medical assistance. The issue for the Court in this case was not whether there was a right to die, but instead whether there was an obligation to prolong life when the patient was terminally ill.

# **4. Anti-terror and Security Legislation**

In many ways the constitutional challenges to anti-terror and security challenges have tested the normative foundations of the SC's seemingly progressive jurisprudence on the 'right to life and personal liberty'. The superstructure of Article 21 built in a host of cases discussed before seems to stand on unstable foundations as the Court struggles to even frame the constitutional debate in the context of anti-terror and security legislation. The Court's response to the constitutional challenges to these legislation also demonstrates the inherent weakness of the Article 21 jurisprudence that has been developed since *Maneka.*

In this section, the constitutional challenges to the Armed Forces Special Powers Act 1958 (AFSPA), the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act 1987 (TADA), and the Prevention of Terrorism Act 2002 (POTA) are considered. The AFSPA gives power to the executive to declare an area as 'disturbed' and within such areas, amongst other powers, allows the armed forces to arrest without warrant and shoot at sight in case of an unlawful assembly.<sup>66</sup> AFSPA is now applicable in parts of all seven States in the North East and also in Jammu and Kashmir. TADA, which lapsed in 1995, was applicable in declared 'disturbed' areas and permitted long periods in police custody without a charge sheet, made bail provisions onerous for the accused, permitted the use of confessions in police custody as evidence in a trial, and authorised the use of anonymous witnesses.<sup>67</sup> POTA was enacted in March 2002 with provisions largely similar to TADA, and was repealed in December 2004 by Parliament, despite its constitutionality having been upheld by the SC. In *Naga People's Movement of Human Rights* (hereinafter '*Naga People's*'), <sup>68</sup> *Kartar Singh*, <sup>69</sup> and *PUCL*, 70 the Court was concerned with setting the constitutional standards that the State had to meet before taking measures that subverted fair trial protections in the context of security concerns.

It is rather curious that in all three of these cases there is hardly any discussion on the nature of the right being restricted or deprived. A constitutionally relevant method would be to first lay out the content of the right that is sought to be restricted and then proceed to examine the justifications put forth by the State. The cases are remarkable for their lack of balancing of interests, and are focused solely on the reasonableness of the measures taken, rather than examining their impact on the rights in questions. The concern here is not that the Court has come out in favour of the State by upholding the legislation in question; the point is a prior one. Surely, the burden on the State should differ depending on whether the legislative measures in question merely have an incidental impact on the right, or amount to substantial infringement. Further, there needs to be a constitutional examination of the stated aims of the State in introducing such legislation.

On the issue of the State's rationale for anti-terror laws in *Kartar Singh*, and *PUCL* in the context of TADA and POTA, the Court gave a resounding approval for the State's version. The Court precedeed by accepting the background of extremist violence and terrorism provided by the State and then proceeded directly to address the reasonableness of the measures. It is almost as though invoking the national security argument entitles the State to very wide latitude in terms of constitutionally acceptable measures, without having to demonstrate a narrower fit to the aims sought to be achieved.<sup>71</sup>

It has been argued that greater deference to the State is appropriate in respect of anti-terror and security measures adopted under 'conditions of stress', as opposed to in ordinary times.<sup> $72$ </sup> This does not, however, ease the burden on the State to show that it is faced with such 'conditions of stress'. In *Naga People's*, the Court gave the State a free hand in extending the imposition of AFSPA without any outer limit, which led to the rather absurd situation where certain areas had been subject to this Act for decades. At the very least, the State must have an increasing burden, with time to justify the continued imposition of such a special law.

Given the extremely deferential attitude to the State's stated aims, the Court's solution is to design interpretational remedies for the application of the legislation. The Court's preferred method is to read the provisions in such a manner or issue guidelines that might prevent the abuse of power.<sup>73</sup> For example, in *Naga People's*, on the issue of shoot-at-sight powers of the armed forces, the Court takes
the view that there were sufficient inbuilt conditions, such as the officer having to satisfy himself that the situation demanded firing and warning shots having to be fired.<sup> $74$ </sup> Similarly, while addressing the serious concern of custodial violence in the context of police confessions that were made admissible under TADA, the Court in *Kartar Singh* is of the view that the legislation's meagre protections were sufficient.<sup>75</sup>

The Court's approach to these legislation has paved the way to treat these statutes like every other piece of legislation. A contrast to the majority's approach is readily available in Ramaswamy J's dissenting opinion in *Kartar Singh*, which invokes the right against torture entrenched in Article 21 and views the admissibility of custodial confessions within that framework.<sup>76</sup> He concludes that the power of the State to regulate criminal procedure cannot extend to deprivation of fundamental constitutional protections.

## **5. Sexual Minorities**

The judgments in *Naz Foundation*<sup>77</sup> and *Suresh Kumar Koushal*<sup>78</sup> test the provision criminalising sodomy (Section 377, Indian Penal Code 1860) against Article 21. The judgment of the Delhi High Court in *Naz Foundation* and the SC's judgment in *Suresh Kumar Koushal* come to opposite conclusions. The Delhi High Court accepts that Section 377 violates Article 21 by infringing the right to privacy and depriving homosexuals of autonomy, thereby denying them the right to life with dignity. The privacy right constructed by the Court is not spatial privacy but rather privacy of the person where the person has a right to be left alone.<sup>79</sup> Expressing one's sexuality without the interference of community or the State is then viewed by the Court to be at the core of such a right to privacy of the person. Further, the Court argues that at the very core of dignity must lie the autonomy of the private will and the person's freedom of choice and action. Section 377, in the opinion of the Court, took away a fundamental aspect of such autonomy by criminalising sodomy.<sup>80</sup>

The SC's judgment in *Suresh Kumar Koushal*, reversing the judgment of the Delhi High Court and upholding the constitutionality of Section 377, is shallow in its treatment of the Article 21 claim. Apart from citing decisions of the SC on privacy  $\frac{81}{2}$  and the right to life with dignity,  $\frac{82}{2}$  there is hardly any constitutional reasoning that the Court has to offer for finding Section 377 compatible with the 'right to life and personal liberty'.

In *National Legal Services Authority v Union of India*, <sup>83</sup> we see a completely different Court in action on the legal recognition of transgenders as a separate gender identity. The Court reiterates that Article 21 protects individual autonomy, privacy, and dignity.<sup>84</sup> Aided by comparative and international jurisprudence, the Court concludes that 'self-determination of gender is an integral part of personal autonomy' and therefore a facet of 'personal liberty',  $\frac{85}{5}$  and is also a part of the right to life with dignity.<sup>86</sup> The stark difference in the approach to autonomy and dignity under Article 21 between *Koushal* and *National Legal Services Authority* is impossible to explain in terms of constitutional reasoning and interpretation. All that was denied to homosexuals by one bench of the SC for, amongst other reasons, being a *minuscule minority*, was allowed for transgenders by another bench of the Court.

#### **VI. SOCIO-ECONOMIC RIGHTS**

There was a radical shift in the Court's jurisprudence from the early 1980s concerning the very nature of rights protected under Article 21 towards understanding Article 21 as also imposing positive obligations on the State. Therefore, for example, Article 21 does not just protect against the State proactively depriving persons of education, it also imposes an obligation on the State to provide for education. However, this has led the Court into territory that has proven tricky for many apex courts around the world. Unfortunately, the SC has rarely acknowledged the normative difficulties of this task. We do not see fundamental discussions on the nature of socio-economic rights claims in terms of a minimum core or progressive realisation, precise content of the right, and their coverage in terms of beneficiaries. Developing a normative framework would ensure that the judiciary adjudicates all socio-economic rights claims within that framework and does not adopt an unpredictable and uncertain approach for recognition of these rights.

# **1. Right to Education**

Though Article 21A now contains a fundamental right to elementary education, the evolution of the right to education jurisprudence of the SC is interesting for a few reasons. First, it is amongst the early and rare instances of the Court clarifying its position on positive rights in the context of Article 21. Also, it is one of the few instances where the Court grapples with the content of the socioeconomic rights at a normative level, which then ultimately leads to an explicit constitutional and statutory obligation.

The judgment of a two-judge bench of the SC in *Mohini Jain*<sup>87</sup> triggered an interesting disagreement on the content of the right to education. Reading in a positive obligation of the State, the Court ruled that the State under Article 21 has to provide adequate educational institutions at all levels, but is, however, silent on free and compulsory education at any level.<sup>88</sup> However, the constitutional bench in *Unni Krishnan <sup>89</sup>* disagreed with *Mohini Jain* on the scope and content of the right to education and went on to hold that the right meant free and compulsory education until fourteen years of age.<sup>90</sup> Using Articles 41, 45, and 46 under the DPSP, the Court concluded that the constitutional scheme required an intense focus on primary education.<sup>91</sup> While the Court is undoubtedly correct in deciphering the constitutional emphasis on primary education, it has no real explanation for excluding all other levels of education from the right to education.

Nine years after the judgment in *Unni Krishnan*, Parliament inserted Article 21A into the Constitution, making free and compulsory education until the age of fourteen a fundamental right. In pursuance of this mandate, the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act 2009 (RTE Act) was passed by Parliament, which required all schools, including private unaided schools, to set aside 25 per cent of their seats for children belonging to 'disadvantaged groups' and 'weaker sections'.<sup>92</sup> The constitutional validity of the RTE Act (except its application to unaided minority institutions) was first upheld by a three-judge bench in *Society for Unaided Private Schools of Rajasthan*. <sup>93</sup> Article 15(5) and the RTE Act (except its application to *all* minority institutions) were both upheld in *Pramati Educational and Cultural Trust*. 94

The importance given to education at all stages in *Mohini Jain* as part of Article 21 is first

restricted to primary education in *Unni Krishnan*. The Court articulates this right as foundational for our polity, but then finds an exception for unaided minority institutions in *Society for Unaided Private Schools of Rajasthan*. This is further diluted in *Pramati Educational and Cultural Trust*, when the exception is then extended to all minority institutions. Once again, the Court finds itself without any tools for balancing the interests under Article 21 with minority rights in Article 30. Instead, we are left with a bald assertion that enforcing the RTE Act on minority institutions would abrogate their Article 30 rights.

# **2. Right to Health**

The content of the right to health under Article 21 has been largely understood in two ways—first, as access to medical facilities and secondly, as the right to a healthy life. In *Parmanand Katara*, <sup>95</sup> the SC ruled that Article 21 imposed an obligation on all medical professionals to treat emergency cases without any delay. The Court did not explore any constitutional basis for imposing such an obligation and neither did it clarify the extent to which these emergency services were to be made available. In *Paschim Banga Khet Mazdoor Samity*, <sup>96</sup> the SC held that the non-availability of medical facilities is a violation of Article 21, ruling that the State had an obligation to provide medical facilities and that financial constraints are constitutionally unacceptable reasons in such a situation. The Court also issued guidelines to be followed while enforcing this right, but the Court was once again not very forthcoming about the content of such a right. Of course, the institutional capability of the Court to design such a right and provide a workable framework taking into account financial and infrastructural provisions needs to be closely examined.

In a more specific context in terms of access to medicines and treatment, the SC in *Sahara House 97* issued an order stating that universal access must be provided to second-line anti-retroviral therapy for treating AIDS. Here, the Court is absolutely clear that the access to medicines and treatment is immediate and without exception. In *Social Jurists*, 98 the Court ruled that obligations of private hospitals to provide access to medical facilities to the poor meant providing holistic access to health care facilities in these hospitals and not merely setting aside of beds.

# **3. Right to Shelter and Housing**

The right to housing is an area where the SC adopts a conservative approach in comparison to other socio-economic rights,  $\frac{99}{2}$  and the Court is clearly reluctant to use the fully fledged rhetoric around dignity to design immediately realisable remedies. Though there is constant reiteration of the impact homelessness has on dignity, the Court is satisfied to defer to the executive on providing the evictees with alternative accommodation, if at all. This is evident early on in *Olga Tellis*, <sup>100</sup> where the Court, while recognising the right to livelihood in Article 21 in very strong terms and providing for procedural safeguards in terms of a hearing, declined to uphold a right to resettlement before eviction. A similar ruling appears in *Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation v Nawab Khan Gulab Khan*. 101 It is a curious judgment because on the one hand the Court cites the decisions in *Chameli Singh*, 102

*Shantistar Builders*,  $\frac{103}{104}$  and *PG Gupta*<sup>104</sup> to reiterate the importance of livelihood and shelter in ensuring a life with dignity, but on the other couches the problem of unauthorised encroachments in the framework of 'unhygienic ecology', 'traffic hazards', and 'risks to lives of pedestrians'.<sup>105</sup> The Court is unwilling to intervene in the schemes of the competent authority, citing concerns of budgetary allocation and also distances itself from evolving any general system of resettlement before eviction, citing the apprehension that doing so would encourage people to encroach upon public property and abuse the judicial process. $\frac{106}{100}$  The housing and shelter cases present a strange internal dichotomy where the Court is eager to engage in rhetoric about the dignity harms caused by homelessness, but at the same time is unwilling to structure any meaningful remedy to ensure protection from the marginalising impact of homelessness.

## **4. The Right to Food (Security)**

The right to food is another example of a judicially recognised and enforced right being converted into a statutory right. In *People's Union for Civil Liberties*, 107 the petitioners argued that the Government of Rajasthan failed to take measures to address scarcity of food by providing grains at subsidised prices to eligible persons. The first set of detailed orders started from November 2001, where the SC essentially converted a series of government schemes into constitutional guarantees under Article 21. In subsequent orders,  $\frac{108}{108}$  the Court went beyond effective access to foodgrains and issued orders on larger systemic issues affecting hunger and starvation by making modifications to such schemes. The Court unpacked the contents of the right in significant detail, something that it has failed to do in the context of other socio-economic rights. It is clear from these orders that the Court was in the process of developing a robust food security regime that accounted for various structural factors, rather than just ensuring that people received foodgrains.

This approach towards food security has unfortunately been abandoned in the National Food Security Act 2013, where the emphasis is on just giving foodgrains to the poor at highly subsidised rates. The Act has been rightly criticised for concentrating only on food entitlements and ignoring integral aspects of food security such as the non-food elements of nutrition, security of small farmers, protection of livelihoods, control of resources by people, etc.

#### **VII. ENVIRONMENTAL JURISPRUDENCE AND ARTICLE 21**

In the matter of environment cases, the right to life has been read by the courts in two ways—first, a right to a clean environment has been read to be implicit in Article  $21, \frac{109}{100}$  and secondly, the concept of 'sustainable development' has been firmly recognised through a combined reading of Article 21 along with provisions of the Constitution, statutory obligations, and international instruments.<sup>110</sup> The usual practice of the courts has been to enforce environmental statutory obligations of the State, and also award compensation for rights infringement.

In *Indian Council for Enviro-Legal Action*, the Court held that the failure of authorities to carry out their statutory duty to regulate pollution of soil and underground water constituted violation of the right to life of affected persons. 111 In the *Oleum Gas Leak* case, the Court recognised the 'polluter

pays principle' and established the principle of absolute liability of enterprises that engaged in hazardous or inherently dangerous activity.<sup>112</sup>

In *Vellore Citizens' Welfare Forum,* the Court unpacked the concept of sustainable development, reading Article 21 together with the DPSPs in Articles 47, 48A, the fundamental duty enumerated in 51A(g), as well as various environmental legislation to hold that the 'precautionary principle' and the 'polluter pays principle' were two facets of sustainable development. 113 In *MC Mehta v Kamal Nath*, the Court expanded the principle of sustainable development to include the 'public trust doctrine', which enjoins the State to act as a trustee of the natural resources meant for public use. $\frac{114}{11}$ 

The Court has held sustainable development to be a balancing concept between ecology and development.<sup>115</sup> Where an imbalance is alleged, the Court would have to assess rival claims on the basis of scientific and technical reports and with reference to the environment regulations. This necessarily involves taking executive decisions and legislative policymaking through the method of judicial review, and the SC has adopted this activist approach numerous times. <sup>116</sup> For instance, in Vedanta,  $\frac{117}{11}$  the Court revoked the permission of a controversial mining company to mine bauxite in the Niyamgiri Hills, citing the lack of a definite fillip to local jobs as well as the low credibility of the mining company as prominent reasons for refusal of permission. It is to be noted that the company had otherwise obtained all requisite clearances.

However, a completely different approach has been on display by the Court in cases relating to development projects. Here, the SC's approach has been of non-interference on the ground that the issues raised in such cases require technical expertise and involve legislative policymaking and as such, are out of the purview of the Court. $\frac{118}{11}$  In cases concerning the Tehri Hydroelectric Project, Konkan Railways, or the Sardar Sarovar Dam, judicial restraint was advocated by an appeal to the ideal of separation of powers.<sup>119</sup> In *Narmada Bachao Andolan*,<sup>120</sup> the SC declined to examine the environmental impact of the dam and restricted the petition to the matter of rehabilitation.<sup>121</sup>

These cases illustrate that the Court does not regard 'separation of powers' as an ideal to uphold consistently. One explanation is that it is easier to make a prima facie case for the environment based on facts and reports than it is to decide between competing claims of national interest and ecological sustenance. $\frac{122}{122}$  But that can hardly account for the courts' active promotion of infrastructure and development projects where the ecological stakes enter the courtroom already diminished by a development rhetoric that pervades globalising India.

It is suggested that much confusion arises from a lack of coherence on sustainable development and the constitutional contour given to it. Which interests could be fed into its matrix and what weights shall be attached to these interests? A framework that sets no normative limits on the extent of ecology preservation or that of development compounds the risks on the former.<sup>123</sup> Moreover, an incomplete articulation of the principles within sustainable development makes other rights susceptible to perceived development interests. A judicial engagement with these questions could possibly transform 'sustainable development' into a tool of immense objective application.

## **VIII. EVALUATING THE JUDICIAL DISCOURSE**

Before reflecting on the jurisprudence around Article 21, there are larger structural issues with the development of 'right to life and personal liberty' jurisprudence that need to be addressed.

# **1. Restriction and Deprivation: The Burden on the State**

As is evident from the discussion of specific rights, the 'right to life and personal liberty' now captures within it a very wide gamut of rights. How are we to conceptually understand these rights in terms of the claims made by persons and the burden the State must discharge to justify infringement or a violation in this context? Do all these rights identified and developed under the Article 21 occupy the same constitutional significance and position? Essential to this discussion is a point that has received scant attention in the interpretation of Article 21, and it concerns the interpretation of the word 'deprived'. This issue finds place in the opinions rendered in *Gopalan*, but is largely lost thereafter. This strand of the discussion holds significant potential to provide structural and substantive coherence to the meaning of 'right to life and personal liberty'. While Article 19 permits reasonable 'restrictions', the question that arises is whether there is a difference between a right being 'deprived' and a right being 'restricted'. Are we to treat all kinds of impact on Article 21 arising from State action in the same way and subject them to the same level of scrutiny?

The burden on the State should vary with the extent of the infringement, depending on whether it is a 'restriction' or a 'deprivation'. However, the judicial development of Article 21 so far has very little to offer on this. The problem that arises with not undertaking that exercise is that we end up with treating all infringements, irrespective of their extent, alike and subjecting the State to the same burden across the board.

### **2. Hierarchy of Rights?**

Given the sheer breadth of rights being read into Article 21, it is evident that the same level of justification for infringement by the State for all rights recognised by the Court end up being problematic. Das J's opinion in *Gopalan* engages with the idea of a hierarchy of rights. For Das J, at the very top of this hierarchy falls the right to life, which means the right to not have one's life taken except in accordance with law. Then comes the right to the freedom of the person, the right against restraint or coercion of the physical body except according to law. These are the primary rights attached to a person, after which come the auxiliary rights that are attributes of the freedom of the person and are also attached to the person, including, but not limited to, Article 19 rights. Even within the auxiliary rights, Das J seems to accept the existence of a hierarchy where Article 19 rights would fall above the other auxiliary rights since they are more fundamental.

One may not entirely agree with Das J's conceptualisation, particularly on the point that it has no place for socio-economic rights. But the point to be discussed is whether all rights being recognised and enforced under Article 21 must be protected to the same extent in terms of the burden to be discharged by the State. $\frac{124}{124}$  At the risk of simplifying the issues, the question is whether the 'right to sleep' deserves the same level of protection as the right against torture. This discussion is important because one gets the sense that the expansion of the scope of Article 21 has resulted in a diluted standard of review for what we might consider core Article 21 rights (whatever they might be). Judicial deference in anti-terror law cases is one such worrying trend. In cases examining the validity of TADA and POTA, the mere invocation of the national security justification seems to be sufficient to meet the burden of the State. Even though the level of protection afforded to Article 21 rights post-*Maneka* is certainly higher than the *Gopalan* phase, one questions the appropriateness of the

'reasonableness'standard for the wide range of rights that Article 21 currently covers.

# **3. Developing Content of 'Right to Life and Personal Liberty'**

The use of dignity and the 'right-to-life-is-more-than-mere-animal-existence' framework have not been used in a manner to lend any sense of coherence to the content of rights in Article 21. When these frameworks have been used to recognise rights, it has largely been a bald assertion on a caseby-case basis, rather than any attempt to justify the recognition of a right by placing it in any normative framework. The problem with the current approach of the Court is that it leaves the Court with absolute discretion on which rights claims it will recognise, or rather more importantly, which ones it will not. And this issue manifests itself across the different segments discussed above. We see a total absence of the dignity discussion in anti-terror cases, despite foundational infringement of criminal justice protections. The Court's arguments, while upholding the validity of criminalising the attempt to suicide and overruling the Delhi High Court's judgment reading down Section 377, are also strong examples of the problems facing the dignity discourse under Article 21. In essence, it breaks down into whatever any judge says it is. Further, the selective application of the dignity framework in the socio-economic rights discourse is also apparent. In cases concerning the right to housing and shelter of slum and pavement dwellers, the Court's use of dignity does not translate into any meaningful recognition of their rights, much less any protection. It also finds a curious manifestation in the Article 21 cases relating to the environment. In the context of big dams and infrastructure projects, the Court has been unable to achieve consistency on the weight it will assign to the impact on the project-affected groups. The very use of dignity in terms of when it is invoked, and also the manner in which it is used, does not present a picture of principled adjudication.

This use of dignity by the courts is not peculiar to India. Internationally, 'dignity' has been fraught with a conceptual open-endedness that has reduced it to a 'rhetorical flourish', contributing to judicial confusion.<sup>125</sup> A comparative analysis of the use of dignity with respect to South Africa and Canada suggests competing understandings of 'dignity'. On the one hand, it is articulated as respecting individual autonomy, while on the other, it has been understood as mandating protection of people's needs.<sup>126</sup> However, one must ask whether its nebulous conception must necessarily hinder a fundamental commitment to respecting human dignity. As McCrudden argues, 'dignity' offers a universally agreeable principle to recognise the worth of all persons and can thus be seen as a 'place holder' for furthering human rights.<sup>127</sup> To that extent the normative commitment of courts in India towards dignity has at the very least enabled the expansion of the 'right to life and personal liberty'. However, the problem persists in the absence of a coherent understanding of 'dignity' to give content to Article 21 rights.

# **IX. CONCLUSION**

I do believe that it is an important project to revisit the impact of *Maneka* on Article 21. For far too long now we have been viewing the importance of *Maneka* for Article 21 in the light of the ruling in *Gopalan*. Though the argument is obviously not to return to the *Gopalan* position, the call is for us to

interrogate whether *Maneka* goes far enough to provide effective protection to the content of right to life and personal liberty. In its very conception, the 'reasonableness' review is not ideal to protect the core of Article 21 rights. The task of identifying the core, in terms of civil-political, socio-economic, and environmental rights, is an important one that requires clear normative foundations. The SC has regrettably not developed the normative foundations of Article 21, be it the use of dignity or the repeated invoking of the *Munn v Illinois* extract about life being more than animal existence, towards recognising penumbral rights. The process of deciding whether an action or inaction of the State amounts to a violation of the right to life and personal liberty increasingly seems to resemble Potter Stewart J's 'I-know-it-when-I-see-it' test for obscenity.

\* This chapter has been possible due to the tremendous research assistance I received from Akshay Vaddagiri and Rishika Sahgal.

<span id="page-16-0"></span>*AK Gopalan v State of Madras* AIR 1950 SC 27.

*AK Gopalan* [\(n](#page-16-0) 1) [58].

 $^{3}$  *AK Gopalan* [\(n](#page-16-0) 1) [14].

<span id="page-16-1"></span>*Rustom Cavasjee Cooper v Union of India* (1970) 1 SCC 248.

*Rustom Cavasjee Cooper* [\(n](#page-16-1) 4) [52].

<span id="page-16-3"></span>*Maneka Gandhi v Union of India* (1978) 1 SCC 248.

<sup>2</sup> PK Tripathi, 'The Fiasco of Overruling AK Gopalan' AIR 1990 (Jour) 1, 6.

 B Errabbi, 'The Right to Personal Liberty in India: Gopalan Revisited with a Difference' in MP Singh (ed) *Comparative Constitutional Law* (Eastern Book Company 2011).

(1976) 2 SCC 521.

*Gobind v State of Madhya Pradesh* (1975) 2 SCC 148.

<span id="page-16-4"></span>*Francis Coralie Mullin v Administrator, Union Territory of Delhi* (1981) 1 SCC 608.

*Kharak Singh* (n [10](#page-16-2)) [15].

*Kharak Singh* (n [10](#page-16-2)) [13].

 $\frac{15}{2}$  94 US 113 (1877).

*Kharak Singh* (n [10](#page-16-2)) [13].

*Kharak Singh* (n [10](#page-16-2)) [13].

*Maneka Gandhi* ([n](#page-16-3) 6) [29].

*Francis Coralie Mullin* (n [12](#page-16-4)).

*Francis Coralie Mullin* (n [12](#page-16-4)) [8].

*People's Union for Democratic Rights v Union of India* (1982) 3 SCC 235.

*Olga Tellis v Bombay Municipal Corporation* (1985) 3 SCC 545.

*Bandhua Mukti Morcha v Union of India* (1984) 3 SCC 161.

*Mohini Jain v State of Karnataka* (1992) 3 SCC 666.

<span id="page-16-5"></span>*Sunil Batra v Delhi Administration* (1978) 4 SCC 494.

<span id="page-16-6"></span>*Prem Shankar Shukla v Delhi Administration* (1980) 3 SCC 526.

*DK Basu v State of West Bengal* (1997) 1 SCC 416.

Prohibition of Employment as Manual Scavengers and Their Rehabilitation Act 2013.

*Safai Karamchari Andolan v Union of India* 2014 SCC OnLine SC 262.

*Sunil Batra (II) v Delhi Administration* (1980) 3 SCC 488.

*Sunil Batra* (n [25\)](#page-16-5) [197-A].

*Prem Shankar Shukla* (n [26](#page-16-6)) [25].

*State of Maharashtra v Ravikant S Patil* (1991) 2 SCC 373 [3].

 See *Khatri (IV) v State of Bihar* (1981) 2 SCC 493; *Khatri (II) v State of Bihar* (1981) 1 SCC 627; *People's Union for Democratic Rights v Police Commissioner, Delhi Police Headquarters* (1989) 4 SCC 730; *Nilabati Behera v State of Orissa* (1993) SCC 746.

*Dr Upendra Baxi v State of Uttar Pradesh* (1986) 4 SCC 106.

<span id="page-16-2"></span>*Kharak Singh v State of Uttar Pradesh* AIR 1963 SC 1295.