# **CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT**

# MADHAV KHOSLA\*

## **I. INTRODUCTION**

IT is a standard feature of constitutions that they provide a mechanism for their amendment.<sup>1</sup> Yet, few constitutional democracies have had as rich and controversial an experience with the constitutional amendment power as India. The formal amendment power is found in Article 368 of the Indian Constitution. Amendments require a two-thirds majority of Parliament, present and voting, and in certain specified cases, ratification by at least half of the State legislatures. The latter include provisions involving India's federal scheme, such as Articles 245–255, which distribute power between the Union and the States. Further, some changes—like the reorganisation of States under Article 3—may take place through a simple parliamentary majority, in the same manner as the enactment of ordinary legislation.<sup>2</sup> On the one hand, Article 368 has been subject to extensive, straightforward use. The Constitution was recently amended for the hundredth time. From the abolition of privy purses to the creation of local government to radical changes to the right to property and the right to equality, amendments to the Constitution have been frequent and wide-ranging.<sup>3</sup> On the other hand, the meaning and limits of Article 368 have invited intense constitutional adjudication and debate. In particular, the amendment power has, since 1973, been interpreted by the Supreme Court to exclude changes to the 'basic structure' of the Constitution.

Given the impassioned debate over standard judicial review, where judges assess the validity of ordinary legislation, it is hardly surprising that the review of amendments themselves should be viewed with anxiety. Recent work in democratic theory has shown the perverse uses to which entrenchment clauses have been put and the importance of legal change to democratic practice. $4$  We may take the argument against unamendability even further than highlighting its historical misuse and potential dangers. If constitutionalism is about the distinction between sovereignty and government, then judicial review can only legitimately judge government with respect to the sovereign, rather than judge the sovereign itself.<sup>5</sup> The moment judges review constitutional amendments they are reviewing the expression of sovereignty. This must therefore signify a *coup d'état*: they now occupy the position of sovereigns themselves. As Adam Smith observed in his *Lectures on Jurisprudence*, 'To suppose a sovereign subject to judgment, supposes another sovereign.<sup>'6</sup> Further, if we are reluctant to accept that the review of amendments means crowning judges as sovereign, we are then faced with the equally devastating thought that it involves the creation of a lawless society, for we now have a society without any *source* of law. 7

An alternate philosophical account of unamendability might view the judicial review of constitutional amendments less as a matter of shifting the location of sovereign authority and more as a challenge to the representation of sovereignty. Say, for instance, a legislature has the power to amend a constitution through a super-majority. The judicial review of such an amendment might be considered as a challenge to the legislature's capacity to represent popular sovereignty. The

animating logic here is that sovereignty is a formal idea that cannot find instantiation. In such a scenario, judicial review serves as a check and prevents a legislative body from usurping power from the people. Such an account could draw from a view of representation made famous by Sieyès; a view involving an effort to create multiple sites of representation.<sup>8</sup> An outlook of this kind would provide us with a more charitable interpretation of what judges might be doing while reviewing constitutional amendments. They are attempting to secure the conditions that can legitimate the expression of sovereignty.<sup>9</sup>

It is possible to imagine responses to both positions. The Hobbesian would resist this alternate account of representation, and pose the authority question. That is to say, he might emphasise that whatever the account of representation, there must, in practice, be some decision-making body. Insofar as this is true, it would appear that the very act of challenging such a body (by the courts or anyone else) necessarily involves assuming the role of that body. On the other hand, one could argue that the moment there is in-principle agreement on the fact that certain conditions must exist to legitimate the expression of sovereignty, then the protection of those conditions is simply an empirical question. Whether or not courts should be vested with the power to protect such conditions, and in the process review amendments, turns entirely, upon this understanding, on how well they exercise this power.

This brief conceptual background should enable us to appreciate the questions that arise in countries like India, where courts have claimed for themselves the power to review constitutional amendments. The doctrinal details of India's experience have been well covered and are widely known. Instead of providing a worm's-eye view of the intricate legal landscape generated around the basic structure doctrine in India, this chapter has a more modest, clarifying ambition. It hopes to examine and consider how Indian courts have understood the core of the Constitution. If a constitution is not simply a bundle of provisions but instead a document with an architectural framework—a particular identity—then what are its foundations and its essential characteristics? The origins and the development of the basic structure doctrine has been, in part, an attempt to answer this question. It has been an effort to understand the principles on which constitutionalism itself must depend. As a philosophical matter, the question of identity is an old and difficult one. From the Ship of Theseus puzzle to the relationship of a body of clay to a statue, philosophers have long been perplexed by the idea of the 'material constitution'.<sup>10</sup> When does a constitution change to such an extent that it becomes a new constitution? What composite parts of a constitution can be regarded as forming its essence? Amendment clauses might also raise their own riddles, such as the paradox of self-amendment. $\frac{11}{12}$ 

This chapter does not resolve these challenging philosophical queries, but it hopes to show how they have found some degree of expression in India's constitutional landscape. The debate on unconstitutional constitutional amendments—on its normative legitimacy, its empirical practice—is a very real one. It now occupies significance in a range of jurisdictions other than India. $^{12}$  Given that no other jurisdiction has generated as impressive and large a body of case law on this matter, the Indian experience must be regarded as having particular importance.<sup>13</sup> This chapter begins with an examination of the early amendment cases that created the basic structure doctrine. It then considers subsequent developments and the application of the doctrine. Through surveying how Indian courts have wrestled with the idea of an unconstitutional constitutional amendment, this chapter considers the architectural framework that the courts have imagined the Constitution as having.

### **II. THE EMERGENCE OFTHE BASIC STRUCTURE DOCTRINE**

In comparative terms, the Indian Constitution's amendment procedure adopts the middle ground. Apart from select matters, some of which require the approval of at least half of the State legislatures and others which can be changed with a simple parliamentary majority, an amendment requires a twothirds majority of Parliament, present and voting. This approach is situated between that followed in countries like the United States, where the degree of entrenchment is far greater, and the United Kingdom, where all legal changes can take place through a simple majority in Parliament. At the founding, this middle ground was thought to satisfy two competing ideals: the aspiration for a single canonical text, which could guide and inform State action, and the desire for a document flexible enough to enable economic growth, modernisation, and political accommodation.<sup>14</sup>

The vesting of the amendment power in the same institution that enacts ordinary legislation means that a certain creative ambiguity exists about the location of sovereignty.<sup>15</sup> The institution is poised delicately between a Constituent Assembly and a standard legislature. Parliament is both bound by the Constitution and has the power to change it. This suggests that Parliament was conceived of as more than an ordinary legislature—it was regarded as representative in some deeper sense. The concern with an unlimited amendment power emerged in Indian constitutionalism from a change in this understanding of the relationship between Parliament and the Constitution. The status of Parliament became a matter of debate, and the recognition arose that it was from Parliament itself that the people might need protection.

It is hardly fortuitous that the basic structure doctrine emerged through cases on the right to property. Land redistribution was at once a major political agenda as well as one whose achievement implicated the right to property, a right guaranteed by **Part III** of the Constitution. Each of the first four cases which considered the question of an unconstitutional constitutional amendment—and ultimately developed what is now called the 'basic structure doctrine'—involved challenges to land reform measures on the basis of, inter alia, the right to property. The question arose in *Shankari Prasad* Singh Deo, with the enactment of the very first amendment to the Constitution.<sup>16</sup> Article 13 of the Constitution declares laws that contravene the fundamental rights contained in **Part III** of the Constitution to be void. In *Shankari Prasad*, the Court dismissed the suggestion that 'law' in Article 13 of the Constitution would include constitutional amendments. The Court's recognition of Parliament's exclusive and supreme power to amend the Constitution was based upon the distinction between constitutional law and ordinary legislation. The former, being an expression of constituent power, could not itself be subject to challenge. As the Constitution had vested Parliament with the authority to exercise constituent power, there was no place for any other institution or external standard to intervene in the exercise of this power.

*Shankari Prasad* was affirmed when the question of constitutional unamendability resurfaced in the mid-1960s in *Sajjan Singh*. <sup>17</sup> Strictly speaking, the challenge in *Sajjan Singh* focused on whether the proviso to Article 368 had been followed. There was no challenge, in principle, to the idea that Parliament could amend any provision in the Constitution. <sup>18</sup> However, as *Shankari Prasad* was the subject of reconsideration, the Court revisited the more general question of constitutional unamendability. Here, unlike in *Shankari Prasad*, the Supreme Court offered a 3:2 rather than a unanimous verdict. For the majority, the matter was settled by the text: 'the expression "amendment of the Constitution" plainly and unambiguously means amendment of all the provisions of the Constitution'.<sup>19</sup> The framers, it was noted, had been extremely careful in outlining the nature of the

amendment power. Certain provisions could, for example, be changed through a mere simple majority.<sup>20</sup> If, the Court emphasised, Article 368 had been intended to demarcate the procedure and not the substance of the amendment power, it would have said so. The distinction between constituent power and ordinary legislation was again relied upon to reject the argument that 'law' in Article 13 included amendments. No other theory in support of restricting the amendment power was found to be persuasive:

[S]o far as our Constitution is concerned, it would not be possible to deal with the question about the powers of Parliament to amend the Constitution under Article 368 on any theoretical concept of political science that sovereignty rests in the people and the legislatures are merely the delegate of the people. Whether or not Parliament has the power to amend the Constitution must depend solely upon the question as to whether the said power is included in Article 368. The question about the reasonableness or expediency or desirability of the amendments in question from a political point of view would be irrelevant in construing the words of Article 368.<sup>21</sup>

The two minority opinions of M Hidayatullah and JR Mudholkar JJ, however, expressed concern over the idea that Article 368 was absolute and could be used indiscriminately. For Hidayatullah J, the textual argument offered by the majority was unconvincing, quite simply because Article 368 did not explicitly grant the power to amend every single provision. It would be odd, Hidayatullah J observed, for the framers to have devoted such energy and attention to the fundamental rights if 'they were the play things of a special majority'.<sup>22</sup> Rights were understood as holding a unique status:

The rights of a society are made paramount and they are placed above those of the individual. This is as it should be. But restricting the fundamental rights by resort to clauses 2 to 6 of Article 19 is one thing and removing the rights from the Constitution or debilitating them by an amendment is quite another. $\frac{23}{2}$ 

Mudholkar J similarly noted that 'it would indeed be strange' if the fundamental rights, which had been guaranteed with such care, could be 'more easily capable of being abridged or restricted than any of the matters referred to in the proviso to Article  $368'$ . <sup>24</sup> He took note of a decision by the Supreme Court of Pakistan, which had held universal franchise and the form of government to be beyond the power of amendment, <sup>25</sup> and made the following observation regarding the *basic features* of the Constitution:

We may also have to bear in mind the fact that ours is a written Constitution. The Constituent Assembly which was the repository of sovereignty could well have created a sovereign Parliament on the British model. But instead it enacted a written Constitution, created three organs of State, made the union executive responsible to Parliament and the State executives to the State legislatures; erected a federal structure and distributed legislative power between Parliament and the State legislatures, recognized certain rights as fundamental and provided for their enforcement; prescribed forms of oaths of office or affirmations which require those who subscribe to them to owe true allegiance to the Constitution and further require members of the Union judiciary and of the higher judiciary in the States to uphold the Constitution. Above all, it formulated a solemn and dignified preamble which appears to be an epitome of the basic features of the Constitution. Can it not be said that these are indicia of the intention of the Constituent Assembly to give permanence to the basic features of the Constitution?

It is also a matter for consideration whether making a change in the basic feature of the Constitution can be regarded merely as an amendment or would it be, in effect, rewriting a part of the Constitution; and, if the latter, would it be within the purview of Article 368?<sup>26</sup>

These two minority opinions in *Sajjan Singh* give us the early origins of the basic structure doctrine in India. As the question of unamendability was not specifically at issue, both opinions were expressed with tentativeness, raising questions rather than providing answers. But two aspects of the opinions are noteworthy. First, they questioned the idea that the issue at hand could be easily resolved by relying upon the constituent power–ordinary legislation distinction. The exercise of constituent power was itself thought to depend upon certain conditions. Secondly, the opinions gesture towards what such conditions might be. Rights were noted as plausibly holding such a status; as being essential to the very making of higher laws. Mudholkar J went further and suggested that the question might be answered not narrowly in terms of rights but rather in terms of the 'basic features of the Constitution'.

Matters took a decisive turn soon after the decision in *Sajjan Singh*. In *Golak Nath*, a narrow 6:5 majority of the Supreme Court departed from *Shankari Prasad* and *Sajjan Singh* and placed substantive limitations upon Parliament's power to amend the Constitution. $27$  Article 368 was now understood as merely describing the procedure for amendment. The substantive nature of the amendment power was instead thought to be found in Entry 97 of List I of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution. According to the Court, 'the power of the Parliament to amend the Constitution is derived from Articles 245, 246, and 248 of the Constitution and not from Article 368 thereof which only deals with procedure'.<sup>28</sup> Central to this reasoning was the idea that a constitutional amendment was simply a legislative act like any other. Parliament was a *legislature*. 'Amendment', as Subba Rao CJ put it, 'is a legislative process.'<sup>29</sup> Article 368 was not the route for the enactment of a new constitution. Rao CJ even suggested that if this was indeed the project, a new Constituent Assembly might be in order:

Nor are we impressed by the argument that if the power of amendment is not all comprehensive there will be no way to change the structure of our Constitution or abridge the fundamental rights even if the whole country demands for such a change. Firstly, this visualizes an extremely unforeseeable and extravagant demand; but even if such a contingency arises, the residuary power of the Parliament may be relied upon to call for a Constituent Assembly for making a new Constitution or radically changing it. The recent Act providing for a poll in Goa, Daman, and Diu is an instance of analogous exercise of such residuary power by the Parliament. We do not express our final opinion on this important question.<sup>30</sup>

The Court found little merit in the argument based upon sovereignty or constituent power. It noted that 'One need not cavil at the description of an amending power as sovereign power, for it is sovereign only within the scope of the power conferred by a particular constitution.<sup>31</sup> Once the argument based upon constituent power was rejected, two questions remained. The first was how limitations upon Article 368 could be justified; and the second was what such limitations would be. Both questions were answered by turning to Article 13. The provision, it was held, would apply to constitutional amendments. The word 'law' would include constitutional amendments rather than simply statutes or executive orders. Making constitutional amendments subject to Article 13 meant that they could no longer violate  $Part III$  of the Constitution.

The *Golak Nath* solution to the question of constitutional amendment was neat. Amendments were similar to any other law passed by Parliament and, as such, they could not encroach upon the rights guaranteed by the Constitution. Rights formed the inviolable core of the Constitution: 'fundamental rights are given a transcendental position under our Constitution and are kept beyond the reach of Parliament.<sup>32</sup> It was further observed that situations in which rights could be modified or suspended had been explicitly provided for in the text, and it would have been meaningless for the Constitution to limit State action on the basis of rights and then allow it to overrun those rights.<sup>33</sup> Without the *Part*  $III$  limitation on Article 368, the Court noted, fundamental rights could be removed without the consent of the States, whereas less significant provisions would require their approval. $34$ 

While *Golak Nath* was subject to the predictable criticism that it had failed to fully grasp the meaning of constituent power, the route it embraced for making its claims attracted further trouble. It seemed odd to locate the substantive power of amendment within the Union List in Schedule VII and

yet give States a role in the procedural enactment of amendments. The rationale, relying upon a comparison between parliamentary power in India and the United Kingdom, failed to capture the precise nature of the Indian scheme. The reliance upon Article 13 seemed equally unpersuasive. It opened up a range of strange possibilities. For instance, a fundamental right could not be limited, but the right to free and fair elections—which fell outside **Part III**—could be amended and removed. Further, the word 'law' was used in a wide range of provisions in the Constitution, in many instances clearly distinguishing it from the Constitution. <sup>35</sup> The *Golak Nath* answer was simple, but it was not convincing.

Expectedly, *Golak Nath* resulted in a constitutional amendment. The Twenty-fourth Amendment to the Constitution clarified Articles 13 and 368, making it clear that there were no restrictions upon Parliament in its exercise of the amendment power. The Amendment, along with the Twenty-fifth Amendment, which diluted the right to property, was itself challenged in *Kesavananda Bharati*, a decision that would come to acquire canonical status within Indian constitutional law.<sup>36</sup> The case was heard by thirteen judges, the largest ever bench of the Supreme Court of India. The verdict was narrow: a 7:6 verdict, with HR Khanna J's opinion making the ultimate difference. The judgment, which placed substantive limitations upon Parliament's power to amend the Constitution, is the longest Indian judicial decision to have yet been authored.

*Kesavananda Bharati* has invited an outpouring of scholarship. The positions taken by the different judges have raised questions about the precise *ratio* that can be discerned from the case. <sup>37</sup> Scholars have explored the various judicial philosophies at work, especially the outlook towards the question of parliamentary sovereignty.<sup>38</sup> Attention has been devoted to the heavy political drama surrounding the case—the clash between Parliament and the Supreme Court; the personalities of the political actors, lawyers, and judges involved; the non-legal factors which might have shaped the outcome; and so forth.<sup>39</sup> For present purposes, we will focus upon the Supreme Court's ultimate ruling, that the Indian Constitution places not merely procedural but also substantive limitations upon the amendment power. *Kesavananda Bharati* overruled *Golak Nath* in important respects. It recognised the difference between constitutional law and ordinary legislation, and rejected the idea that the substantive power to amend the Constitution lay within the Union's residuary powers of legislation. Instead of relying upon Article 13, it placed restrictions upon the amendment power by virtue of Article 368 itself. Six of the seven judges that constituted the majority found inherent or implied limitations in the nature of Article 368. Khanna J, whose opinion tipped the balance in favour of the basic structure doctrine, focused instead upon the internal character of an *amendment*. Sovereignty was located with the people, and Parliament was only authorised to *amend* the Constitution rather than enact a new one. $\frac{40}{10}$  To amend a document was different from repealing it, and was similarly different from an exercise in wholesale revision. As Khanna J put it:

I am further of the opinion that amendment of the Constitution necessarily contemplates that the Constitution has not to be abrogated but only changes have to be made in it. The word 'amendment' postulates that the old Constitution survives without loss of its identity despite the change and continues even though it has been subjected to alterations. As a result of the amendment, the old Constitution cannot be destroyed and done away with; it is regained though in the amended form. What then is meant by the retention of the old Constitution? It means the retention of the basic structure or framework of the old Constitution. A mere retention of some provisions of the old Constitution even though the basic structure or framework of the Constitution has been destroyed would not amount to the retention of the old Constitution. Although it is permissible under the power of amendment to effect changes, howsoever important, and to adapt the system to the requirements of changing conditions, it is not permissible to touch the foundation or to alter the basic institutional pattern.<sup>41</sup>

Both *Golak Nath* and *Kesavananda Bharati* challenged the idea that Parliament was sovereign in its

exercise of the amendment power. In both cases, the very exercise of the amendment power by Parliament could only occur against the satisfaction of certain background conditions. Only such conditions could legitimate the exercise of power. Where both cases differed was in their understanding of what these conditions were. *Kesavananda Bharati* offered a more open-ended answer than *Golak Nath* had. It shifted the focus from specific textual provisions (ie, Part III) to abstract principles, which formed the core building blocks of the Constitution. The 'basic structure or framework of the Constitution' could not be exhaustively enumerated; only an illustrative list could be provided. Different judges provided examples, which included democracy, federalism, separation of powers, individual freedom, and secularism.<sup>42</sup> According to Khanna J, the rights contained in *Part III* were not per se immutable: 'Subject to the retention of the basic structure or framework of the Constitution… the power of amendment is plenary and would include within itself the power to add, alter, or repeal the various articles including those relating to fundamental rights.<sup> $43$ </sup> It was only by application to particular amendments that greater specificity could be provided to the content of the basic structure.

This imprecision was inevitable. The argument that the exercise of amendment was different from the exercise of wholesale revision could not be explicated on textual terms. On a plain reading of the Constitution, one could argue that some parts of the text were more important than others. There was no textual strategy, however, by which to make this prioritisation. Any attempt at making such a prioritisation was to be necessarily inventive and messy. The text itself could not unpack the distinction between legitimate and illegitimate constitutional change. This task could only be achieved by turning to two or three fixed values around which the Constitution was to be anchored. *Kesavananda Bharati* ushered in this turn into Indian constitutionalism.

# **III. THE APPLICATION OFTHE BASIC STRUCTURE DOCTRINE**

The basic structure doctrine has been applied in a wide range of cases. In this part, I focus on cases involving challenges to constitutional amendments, and exclude from my analysis cases in which the doctrine has been used to interpret existing constitutional provisions or those in which it has been applied to legislative and executive action. A diverse set of constitutional amendments have been subject to basic structure review. Despite their variety, however, these cases have by and large been about either democracy or rights. Democracy and rights have been two values around which debates on the basic structure have been framed and performed. Both present conditions upon which the expression of sovereign power might be thought to depend. The application of the basic structure doctrine has been an effort to understand what demands these conditions entail.

# **1. Democracy-based Challenges**

In the four aforementioned cases, the question of constitutional unamendability arose in the context of the right to property. It was with regard to the dilution of this right that the Supreme Court reflected upon the extent to which rights and the Constitution could change. The first case to apply the basic structure doctrine, however, involved a democracy-based challenge: it arose from the fear of
authoritarianism. The Thirty-ninth Amendment to the Constitution voided a High Court decision that had set aside Indira Gandhi's election as a Member of Parliament, took away the right to any potential appeal from the High Court's decision, and removed the election of the Prime Minister from judicial review. The Amendment became the subject of challenge in *Indira Nehru Gandhi v Raj Narain*. 44

*Indira Nehru Gandhi* is an interesting case because one of the grounds on which the Thirty-ninth Amendment was attacked was that the amending power could not be used to decide a specific legal dispute. The Chief Justice, AN Ray, noted how the impugned provision Article 329A validated an election by passing 'a declaratory judgment and not a law'.<sup>45</sup> KK Mathew J put the point in sharp terms:

A judgment or sentence which is the result of the exercise of judicial power or of despotic discretion is not a law as it has not got the generality which is an essential characteristic of law. A despotic decision without ascertaining the facts of a case and applying the law to them, though dressed in the garb of law, is like a bill of attainder. It is a legislative judgment.<sup>46</sup>

The more straightforward challenge in *Indira Nehru Gandhi* focused upon the separation of powers and ingredients of democratic rule. Legislatively validating an invalid election, without changing the law that made the election invalid and without any judicial application to the facts of the case, would, Mathew J observed, 'toll the death knell of the democratic structure of the Constitution'.  $\frac{47}{1}$  The impugned provision took away 'the mechanism for determining the real representative of the people in an election as contemplated by the Constitution'. $\frac{48}{3}$  Khanna J similarly noted that to make an election immune from challenge and to prevent any questioning of the election before any forum whatsoever, however serious the improprieties and violations might be, would be 'subversive of the principle of free and fair election in a democracy'.  $\frac{49}{2}$ 

In *Charan Lal Sahu*, a case that soon followed, the Supreme Court distinguished the facts in *Indira Nehru Gandhi* with Article 71(3) of the Constitution. <sup>50</sup> As per this provision, 'Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may by law regulate any matter relating to or connected with the election of a President or Vice President.<sup>'51</sup> The Court observed that while, in *Indira Nehru Gandhi*, Article 329A(4) 'took away the jurisdiction of this Court to decide disputes pending in appeals before it, because Parliament had, after practically deciding these disputes, directed this Court to carry out whatever was laid down in the form of a constitutional amendment',  $\frac{52}{2}$  Article 71(3) did not take away the jurisdiction to decide a matter pending before the Court. Instead, it simply dealt with the regulation of Presidential elections and excluded from review a law falling under Article 71(1). Given that the Court was the body before which the election of the President could be questioned, Article 71(3) was permissible, for it merely gave effect to 'a well-known general principle which is applied by this Court that a Court or Tribunal functioning or exercising its jurisdiction under an enactment will not question the validity of that very enactment which is the source of its powers'.<sup>53</sup> The Court's self-description was one of an election tribunal constituted by Parliament under Article 71(1).

This reasoning assumes away rather than answers the basic structure challenge, but the decision in *Charan Lal Sahu* might be understood by the fact that the election of the Prime Minister was a direct attack on democracy in a way that the election of the President was not. In *Indira Nehru Gandhi*, the attack posed a special danger given the political context, a context that played an important role in the decision. 54 It is also worth noting that *Indira Nehru Gandhi* did not only involve a limitation upon judicial power—it also involved Parliament's own exercise of judicial power in non-judicial ways.

Judicial power—whether it be the structures that facilitate judicial independence or the matters on

which jurisdiction is exercised and judicial review is performed—has dominated democracy-based basic structure challenges. In *P Sambamurthy v State of Andhra Pradesh*, 55 for example, Article 371-D(5) was under challenge. This provision empowered the State government to modify or annul the verdict of an administrative tribunal (established under clause (3) to adjudicate a range of public employment matters). This meant that it 'would be open to the State government, after it has lost before the administrative tribunal, to set at naught the decision given by the administrative tribunal against it'.<sup>56</sup> Such a scenario, the Court held, violated the rule of law—which was a basic feature of the Constitution. According to the Court,

the exercise of power by the executive or any other authority must not only be conditioned by the Constitution but must also be in accordance with law, and the power of judicial review is conferred by the Constitution with a view to ensuring that the law is observed and there is compliance with the requirement of law on the part of the executive and other authorities.  $57$ 

The Court drew an important link between judicial review and the rule of law, holding that the presence of the former made the observance of the latter possible. Consequently, if the State government had the power to set aside the exercise of judicial review by modifying or annulling the decision of an administrative tribunal, 'it would sound the death knell of the rule of law'.<sup>58</sup>

The importance of judicial power has also been at issue in cases relating to tribunals. In *Sampath Kumar*, the Supreme Court considered whether limitations could be placed upon the High Courts' powers under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution.<sup>59</sup> In permitting the transfer of power from the High Courts to the tribunals, the Court made two important points. First, the Supreme Court's powers as an appellate institution were unaffected: 'judicial review by this Court is left wholly unaffected and thus there is a forum where matters of importance and grave injustice can be brought for determination or rectification'. <u><sup>60</sup></u> Secondly, and more importantly, the creation of tribunals was not so much an exclusion of judicial review as a transfer of that power from one institution to another. The key requirement, therefore, was that 'the Tribunal should be a real substitute for the High Court—not only in form and *de jure* but in content and de facto'. <sup>61</sup> A decade later, *Chandra Kumar* sought to reconcile a host of post-*Sampath Kumar* decisions and considered the operation of administrative tribunals.<sup>62</sup> Upon surveying the relevant statutory framework, the Supreme Court noted that the tribunals under examination 'were intended to perform a substitutional role as opposed to … a supplemental role with regard to the High Courts'. <sup>63</sup> Departing from the *Sampath Kumar* approach that the power of the High Court under Article 226 could be limited so long as an effective alternative institution existed—the Court observed that the Constitution contained provisions that not only outlined the power that the Supreme Court and High Courts could exercise, but also those dealing with the tenure, appointment, salaries, and so forth of judges. As these 'constitutional safeguards which ensure the independence of the judges of the superior judiciary' did not exist for subordinate judges or those in tribunals, tribunal members 'can never be considered full and effective substitutes for the superior judiciary in discharging the function of constitutional interpretation'.  $\frac{64}{ }$  It is for this reason that the Court held that the power of the Supreme Court and High Courts to examine the constitutionality of legislation under Articles 32 and 226 could not be limited. Tribunals could only perform 'a supplemental—as opposed to a substitutional—role ... '<sup>65</sup>

A second kind of democracy-based basic structure challenge to have emerged in Indian constitutionalism is linked to representation. While in the case of judicial power, the animating theme has been that Parliament cannot claim to be beyond supervision, challenges based upon representation have forced the Supreme Court to confront the precise terms of electoral politics. In *Kihoto* *Hollohan*, the topic of representation came up in the context of an anti-defection amendment to the Constitution.<sup>66</sup> The Court considered whether limitations could be placed upon the voting preferences of legislators, by tying them to the views of their political party through an anti-defection law. The Court concluded that rather than undermining the principles of democratic government, such a law in fact strengthened democracy by bringing stability to electoral politics. Built into the Court's reasoning was the importance of political parties and a belief that they are the vehicle through which democratic politics is mediated. The stability of a political party, the Court noted, 'depends on such shared beliefs and concerted action of its Members in furtherance of those commonly held principles'.<sup>67</sup> Consequently, the 'freedom of its Members to vote as they please independently of the political party's declared policies will not only embarrass its public image and popularity'.<sup>68</sup> It would also, as per the Court's reasoning, 'undermine public confidence' in the party and thus impact 'its very survival'.<sup>69</sup>

In *RC Poudyal*, the question of representation arose in a different context.<sup>70</sup> Here, the Supreme Court considered the conditions under which new States could be created under Article 2 of the Constitution. Sikkim was being admitted into the Indian Union with a structure of legislative representation that granted special treatment to certain communities. Importantly, the extent of this treatment was disproportionate to their population; it was higher than proportionate preferential treatment would have been, inviting the charge that this violated the principle for special treatment enshrined in Article 332 of the Constitution and the ideal of one person, one vote. In upholding the impugned provision, the Court adopted a rather relaxed definition of political participation. It found that 'the concept of "one person one vote" is in its very nature considerably tolerant of imbalances and departures from a very strict application and enforcement' and that 'proportionality of representation' was 'not intended to be expressed with arithmetical precision'.  $\frac{71}{1}$  Remarkably enough, the Court observed that '[a]ccommodations and adjustments, having regard to the political maturity, awareness and degree of political development in different parts of India, might supply the justification for even non-elected Assemblies wholly or in part, in certain parts of the country'.<sup>72</sup>

Both *Kihoto Hollohan* and *RC Poudyal* suggest that the Supreme Court has been deferential towards Parliament in determining how the abstract ideal of self-government must find expression in practice. The Court's approach towards separation-of-powers claims, and in particular those involving judicial power, has been more rigorous and searching. We see this in the Court's recent decision to invalidate the Ninety-ninth Amendment to the Constitution.<sup>73</sup> This Amendment established a federal commission for the appointment of judges to the higher judiciary that would have replaced the previous collegium framework for appointments. The composition of the proposed commission was found to be faulty on several grounds, the most serious of which was that it took away judicial primacy in the appointments process. By doing so, the measure was found to infringe upon judicial independence and thereby violate the basic structure doctrine. One way to view this approach of the Court charitably—rather than cynically reducing it to a judicial attempt to preserve judicial power is to see it as emanating from and preserving the principle that Parliament's powers are never sovereign: they must always be subject to justification.

## **2. Rights-based Challenges**

A second set of challenges involving the basic structure doctrine has focused upon rights—on the extent to which a constitutional amendment can infringe upon or restrict a right. These challenges have often arisen in the context of Articles 31A–C, savings clauses which permit Parliament to enact certain kinds of legislation which are immune from rights-based challenges. A major, early case in this context is *Minerva Mills*, which dealt with a nationalisation statute that had been inserted into the Ninth Schedule.<sup>74</sup> Here, two provisions of the Forty-second Amendment to the Constitution were under challenge. The first amended Article 31C, to immunise all laws in furtherance of the Directive Principles from Articles 14 and 19 challenges, while the second further clarified Parliament's supreme power under Article 368 and excluded amendments from judicial review. The change to Article 368 was easily dismissed, for it was 'the function of the judges, nay their duty, to pronounce upon the validity of laws<sup> $25$ </sup> and the 'donee of a limited power cannot by the exercise of that power convert the limited power into an unlimited one'.<sup>76</sup> It was the amendment to Article 31C that dominated the Supreme Court's attention.

Given *Kesavananda*, the Court noted that it was 'only if the rights conferred by these two Articles are not a part of the basic structure of the Constitution that they can be allowed to be abrogated by a constitutional amendment'.<sup>77</sup> In striking down the provision, the Court held that the balance between Parts III and IV—between rights and directive principles—was central to the Constitution's architecture. While Part IV provided the *ends* of government, Part III laid out the *means* through which those ends could be achieved. The Court went as far as to note that 'the Indian Constitution is founded on the bedrock of the balance between Parts III and IV'. 78 In doing so, *Minerva Mills* made it clear that (a) the right to equality and the liberties guaranteed by Article 19 were part of the Constitution's basic structure; and (b) to privilege the directive principles over rights or vice versa would mean to alter the identity of the Constitution.

One of the interesting arguments offered by the State in *Minerva Mills* was that Article 31C should be declared constitutional, as Article 31A had been previously so declared. The Court rejected this, holding that Article 31A applied to a specific set of laws, whereas Article 31C had no such limitations. While this difference is indeed accurate, and although Article 31A was not itself under challenge, it is worth asking whether the validity of Article 31A—given its exclusion of Articles 14 and 19—could indeed have been sustained given the Court's view of the equal relationship between Parts III and IV. This matter was to resurface in *Waman Rao*, where Articles 31A, 31B, and 31C (as unamended) were under challenge.<sup>79</sup> Here the Court emphasised that 'every case in which the protection of a fundamental right is withdrawn will not necessarily result in damaging or destroying the basic structure of the Constitution'. <sup>80</sup> The matter would turn on 'which particular Article of **Part**  $III$  is in issue and whether what is withdrawn is quintessential to the basic structure of the Constitution'.<sup>81</sup>

Surveying a range of parliamentary speeches and historical documents, the Court concluded that agrarian reform was a major constitutional ideal. As a result, 'if Article 31-A were not enacted, some of the main purposes of the Constitution would have been delayed and eventually defeated  $\ldots$  <sup>82</sup> In fact, the Court observed, somewhat at odds with the very premise of the basic structure doctrine which rests upon a conceptual distinction between amendments and the original text—that the impugned amendments 'were made so closely on the heels of the Constitution that they ought indeed to be considered as a part and parcel of the Constitution itself'.<sup>83</sup> While it made broad statements on India's constitutional philosophy, the Court said very little about how this conclusion might be harmonised with the **Part III–Part IV** balance of which *Minerva Mills* had so strongly spoken.

Article 31B had a different character to  $31A.84$  In the case of Article 31A, any law passed within the framework of clauses (a) to (e) receives protection and cannot be challenged as violative of Articles 14 and 19. Article 31B, on the other hand, is more catholic. It does not outline any specific category of laws immune from challenge and provides protection against all **Part III** challenges. However, additions to the Ninth Schedule must take place through a constitutional amendment; the protection does not become operative through an ordinary legislative enactment, as in the case of Article 31A. Treating *Kesavananda Bharati* as setting the relevant timeline, the Court held that 'insofar as the validity of Article 31-B read with the Ninth Schedule is concerned, we hold that all Acts and Regulations included in the Ninth Schedule prior to April 24, 1973, will receive the full protection of Article 31-B'.<sup>85</sup> However, all additions to the Ninth Schedule after this date would be 'valid only if they do not damage or destroy the basic structure of the Constitution'.<sup>86</sup>

The third savings clause under consideration in *Waman Rao* was Article 31C. This provision protected laws from Articles 14, 19, and 31 challenges if they furthered the goals outlined in Articles 39(b) and (c) of the Constitution.  $87$  The Court held that:

[I]f we are right in upholding the validity of Article 31-A on its own merits, it must follow logically that the unamended Article 31- C is also valid. The unamended portion of Article 31-C is not like an uncharted sea. It gives protection to a defined and limited category of laws which are passed for giving effect to the policy of the State towards securing the principles specified in clause (*b*) or clause (*c*) of Article 39 … Whatever we have said in respect of the defined category of laws envisaged by Article 31-A must hold good, perhaps with greater force, in respect of laws passed for the purpose of giving effect to clauses (*b*) and (*c*) of Article 39. It is impossible to conceive that any law passed for such a purpose can at all violate Article 14 or Article 19. Article 31 is now out of harm's way. In fact, far from damaging the basic structure of the Constitution, laws passed truly and bona fide for giving effect to directive principles contained in clauses  $(b)$  and  $(c)$  of Article 39 will fortify that structure.<sup>88</sup>

As we can see, *Waman Rao* approached the relationship between the fundamental rights and directive principles in a different way to *Minerva Mills*. The former outlook was followed in *Sanjeev Coke*, where the Court went far enough to doubt the soundness and validity of the decision in *Minerva Mills*.<sup>89</sup> In the more recent case of *IR Coelho*, the Supreme Court considered the question of whether all laws inserted into Article 31B (read with the Ninth Schedule) were immune from judicial review, given the validity of this savings clause.  $\frac{90}{90}$  The Court chose not to revisit the constitutionality of Article 31B and treated the provision as valid. It held, however, that the validity of Article 31B did not automatically validate all legislation inserted into the Ninth Schedule. Any law inserted after the date of the decision in *Kesavananda Bharati* (24 April 1973) would be tested against the standard of the basic structure doctrine, as the insertion of this law into the Ninth Schedule would be a constitutional amendment. The Court carefully noted that while Articles 31A and 31C provide certain criteria as regards their exercise, Article 31B simply excludes laws from **Part III** challenges: 'insertion in the Ninth Schedule is not controlled by any defined criteria or standards by which the exercise of power may be evaluated. The consequence of insertion is that it nullifies entire Part III of the Constitution.<sup> $91$ </sup> It also considered how the provision had been used: 'the unchecked and rampant exercise of this power, the number having gone from 13 to 284, shows that it is no longer a mere exception.<sup> $22$ </sup> What this effectively meant was that Parliament had given itself powers under Article 31B that it did not have under Article 368:

If constituent power under Article 368, the other name for amending power, cannot be made unlimited, it follows that Article 31-B cannot be so used as to confer unlimited power. Article 31-B cannot go beyond the limited amending power contained in Article 368. The power to amend Ninth Schedule flows from Article 368. This power of amendment has to be compatible with the limits on the power of amendment. This limit came with *Kesavananda Bharati*. Therefore Article 31-B after 24-4-1973 despite its wide language cannot confer unlimited or unregulated immunity.<sup>93</sup>

While *IR Coelho* has thus shifted the ground to a certain extent and the Ninth Schedule is no longer a kind of black hole, the Supreme Court's general approach to rights has been to treat them as instrumental in character, as means towards some larger social goal. Even when we move beyond savings clauses and see specific challenges, such as the equality-based challenges to amendments to Articles 15 and 16, we find that the Court's attention is less on technical infractions of the concerned right and more on whether the impugned measure can be defended on the basis of some broader social purpose. The basic structure of the Constitution has been understood less in terms of rights—as necessary means towards certain goals, which can legitimate the exercise of higher law-making—and more in terms of those goals themselves.

## **IV. CONCLUSION**

The basic structure doctrine aims to put forth an interpretive approach that is distinct from the ones that we typically associate with the task of constitutional interpretation; it is an approach that asks what values and principles must exist for constitutionalism itself to exist. Constitutions cannot provide for their own validity. Just as constitutionalism itself must rest on presuppositions that are not internal to a constitutional document, the process of a constitutional amendment too can be understood as operating at a level antecedent to the formal prescribed criterion.<sup>94</sup> The basic structure doctrine emerged, as Upendra Baxi once argued, from the fear that 'if you do not apply brakes, the engine of amending power would soon overrun the Constitution'.<sup>95</sup> Debates on the doctrine, whether involving democracy-based challenges or rights-based ones, have sought to grasp which kinds of breaks are required to maintain the ground below constitutionalism's feet.

Although this chapter has focused upon constitutional amendments, such cases do not exhaust the use of the doctrine. At times, the doctrine has been used as an interpretive aid towards understanding the meaning of specific constitutional provisions. Prominent examples include *SR Bommai* and *Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Association*. <sup>96</sup> A different set of basic structure cases not involving constitutional amendments are those relating to statutes and executive action. An important area of contention has been whether the doctrine should apply to such state action. This question was attempted to be settled in *Kuldip Nayar*, which held that the basic structure doctrine would be limited to constitutional amendments.  $\frac{97}{2}$  On the one hand, this reasoning seems unpersuasive, for it suggests that a lower law would be allowed to achieve what a higher law cannot. On the other hand, any call for expanding the application of the basic structure doctrine must explain why lower law violations cannot be addressed through standard constitutional and administrative law doctrines.<sup>98</sup> In other words, they would need to explain what purpose basic structure review would serve in such instances. There can be a political answer to this question: it would show how egregious a statutory violation might be. The violation would be so serious that the measure does not simply violate a provision of the Constitution, but rather the Basic Structure of the document. Cases like *R Gandhi*, where the Court reviewed the constitutionality of a statute on standard grounds like legislative competence, but also referenced the basic structure doctrine, might be gesturing towards such an outlook.<sup>99</sup> In legal terms, however, the precise doctrinal role that the the basic structure doctrine would play if it were applied to statutes, in comparison with what is already achieved by ordinary judicial review, is not entirely clear.  $\frac{100}{100}$ 

The success of the basic structure doctrine turns on the judiciary's capacity to claim that it can protect the conditions for the expression of sovereignty more responsibly than Parliament. This task is easier within India's constitutional framework than in some others, for it is easier to make competing representative claims in situations where amendments are not enacted by the people themselves (unlike, say, in cases where the people may amend a constitution directly through a referendum or plebiscite). But the formal rules of the amendment power can only help so much. Ultimately, whether the basic structure doctrine remains an integral and vibrant feature of Indian constitutionalism will depend neither on the technical distinction between sovereignty and government nor the rules for amending the Constitution, but quite simply on how persuasively the doctrine is applied. The authority of courts will turn on how the use of their power is received. 'Here', as HLA Hart once observed in a different but not entirely unrelated context, 'all that succeeds is success.'<sup>101</sup>

\* For help of various kinds, I am grateful to Gautam Bhatia, Sujit Choudhry, Pratap Bhanu Mehta, Ananth Padmanabhan, Varun Srikanth, Arun Kumar Thiruvengadam, Richard Tuck, Mark Tushnet, and Raeesa Vakil.

 $1$  For a helpful overview of constitutional amendment rules, see Rosalind Dixon, 'Constitutional Amendment Rules: A Comparative Perspective' in Tom Ginsburg and Rosalind Dixon (eds) *Comparative Constitutional Law* (Edward Elgar 2011) 96.

 $2^2$  These changes are not, strictly speaking, regarded as amendments.

<sup>3</sup> See Rukmini S, 'How has the Indian Constitution Evolved Over the Years?' (*The Hindu*, 30 May 2015) [<http://www.thehindu.com/data/how-the-constitution-has-evolved-over-the-years/article7263635.ece](http://www.thehindu.com/data/how-the-constitution-has-evolved-over-the-years/article7263635.ece)>, accessed October 2015.

<sup>4</sup> See Melissa Schwartzberg, *Democracy and Legal Change* (Cambridge University Press 2007).

<sup>5</sup> For a historical account of the sovereignty–government distinction, see Richard Tuck, *The Sleeping Sovereign: The Invention of Modern Democracy* (Cambridge University Press 2015).

<sup>6</sup> Adam Smith, *Lectures on Jurisprudence* (first published 1766, RL Meek and others eds, Liberty Fund 1982) 433.

 $\frac{7}{2}$  This discussion assumes situations in which constitutional unamendability goes with the judicial review of amendments. But these two issues are, of course, theoretically distinct. A constitution can have unamendable provisions without any institutional body that can strike down the amendment of such provisions as unconstitutional. An example might be something like judicial review in the United Kingdom under the Human Rights Act 1998, though this of course raises its own philosophical and practical concerns.

<sup>8</sup> See Bryan Garsten, 'Representative Government and Popular Sovereignty' in Ian Shapiro and others (eds) *Political Representation* (Cambridge University Press 2010) 90.

 $9$  See Pratap Bhanu Mehta, 'The Inner Conflict of Constitutionalism: Judicial Review and the Basic Structure' in Zoya Hasan, E Sridharan, and R Sudarshan (eds) *India's Living Constitution: Ideas, Practices, Controversies* (Permanent Black 2002) 179.

 $\frac{10}{10}$  See Michael C Rea, 'The Problem of Material Constitution' (1995) 104 Philosophical Review 4.

<sup>11</sup> See Peter Suber, *The Paradox of Self-Amendment: A Study of Logic, Law, Omnipotence, and Change* (Peter Lang 1990).

<sup>12</sup> See Gary Jeffrey Jacobsohn, *Constitutional Identity* (Harvard University Press 2010) 34–83; Aharon Barak, 'Unconstitutional Constitutional Amendments' (2011) 44 Israel Law Review 321; Gábor Halmai, 'Unconstitutional Constitutional Amendments: Constitutional Courts as Guardians of the Constitution?' (2012) 19 Constellations 182; Yaniv Roznai and Serkan Yolcu, 'An Unconstitutional Constitutional Amendment—The Turkish Perspective: A Comment on the Turkish Constitutional Court's Headscarf Decision' (2012) 10 International Journal of Constitutional Law 175; Yaniv Roznai, 'Unconstitutional Constitutional Amendments—The Migration and Success of a Constitutional Idea' (2013) 61 American Journal of Comparative Law 657; Carlos Bernal, 'Unconstitutional Constitutional Amendments in the Case Study of Colombia: An Analysis of the Justification and Meaning of the Constitutional Replacement Doctrine' (2013) 11 International Journal of Constitutional Law 339.

<sup>13</sup> In South Asia, India's basic structure doctrine has had direct influence. See Osama Siddique, 'Across the Border' (2010) 615 Seminar 52; Ridwanul Hoque, 'Constitutionalism and the Judiciary in Bangladesh' in Sunil Khilnani, Vikram Raghavan, and Arun K. Thiruvengadam (eds) *Comparative Constitutionalism in South Asia* (Oxford University Press 2013) 302, 313–18; Mark Tushnet and Madhav Khosla (eds), *Unstable Constitutionalism: Law and Politics in South Asia* (Cambridge University Press 2015). A recent landmark decision of the Supreme Court of Pakistan has confirmed the Court's powers to review constitutional amendments: *District Bar Association, Rawalpindi v Federation of Pakistan* Constitution Petition No 12 of 2010 and others (5 August 2015).

<sup>14</sup> For an excellent overview of the founding debates on the amendment procedure, see Granville Austin, *The Indian Constitution: Cornerstone of a Nation* (Oxford University Press 1966) 317–29.

 $\frac{15}{2}$  This naturally raises the question—one that I can only pose, rather than answer, on this occasion—of whether the sovereigntygovernment distinction even applies to India. On the institutional requirements for the sovereign–government distinction to exist, see Tuck