#### **Location and Linguistic Affiliation 783**

contribute male heirs to the husband's patrilineage in order to gain authority and power in the family. Often older Jat women's primary responsibilities include direct supervision of their children's socialization. Among the Shahargaon Jats, the elderly women lack physiological knowledge associated with menopause and experience a wide range of menopausal symptoms such as tension, headaches, swelling, and loss of appetite. Some informants also reported a feeling of resentment and anger. Although the elderly Jats rarely seek health care for minor health problems, the joint family system among the Jats provides financial security and facilitates timely health care. Even at this stage in life, Jat men have a privileged social status over Jat women.

## **Dying and Death**

The Jats generally observe 13 days of pollution after death. Jat men are expected to show considerable behavioral restraints during the days of pollution, while Jat women are expected to express their grief in public. The dead are cremated by following the traditional Hindu ritual of cremation in which the eldest son plays an important role. At the death of a married woman, rituals and practices reinforce the notion that she does not belong to her husband's patrilineage. Her sister(s) and natal women relatives prepare the body for cremation and funeral rites.

# **REFERENCES**

- Bowles, G. T. (1977). *The people of Asia*. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson.
- Chowdhry, P. (1994). *The veiled women: Shifting gender equations in rural Haryana 1880–1990*. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
- Datta, N. (1999). *Forming an identity: A social history of the Jats*. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
- Freed, R. S., & Freed, S. A. (1993). *Ghosts: Life and death in north India*. Washington, DC: The American Museum of Natural History.
- Fuchs, S. (1974). *The aboriginal tribes of India*. Delhi: Macmillan India.
- Ibbetson, D. (1916). *Punjab castes*. Lahore: India Press.
- Khanna, S. K. (1995). *Gender discrimination, maternal health, and pregnancy outcomes in north India*. Doctoral dissertation, Syracuse University.
- Khanna, S. K. (1997). Traditions and reproductive technology in an urbanizing north Indian village. *Social Science & Medicine, 44*(2), 171–180.
- Khanna, S. K. (2001). *Shahri* Jat and *dehati Jatni*: The Indian peasant community in transition. *Contemporary South Asia, 10*(1), 37–53.
- Kolenda, P. (1987). *Regional differences in family structure in India*. Jaipur: Rawat Publications.
- Lewis, O. (1958). *Village life in northern India*. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
- Pradhan, M. C. (1966). *The political system of the Jats of northern India*. Bombay: Oxford University Press.
- Qanungo, K. (1982). *History of the Jats: Contribution to the history of northern India*. New Delhi: Surajmal Memorial Education Society.
- Westphal-Hellbusch, S., & Westphal, H. (1964). *The Jat of Pakistan*. Berlin: Duncker & Humbolt.

# **Lijiang Naxi**

### **Sydney Davant White**

# **ALTERNATIVE NAMES**

Currently, the "Lijiang Naxi" and the "Yongning Naxi" (or Mosuo) are officially classified by the People's Republic of China government as members of the same Naxi "minority nationality," with the Mosuo designated as a "branch" of the Naxi; however, both groups see themselves as significantly different peoples. This entry focuses on the Naxi of the Lijiang area, specifically the Naxi of the Lijiang basin. During the Republican Period (1912– 49 CE), the contemporary Naxi of the Lijiang area of the People's Republic of China (PRC—1949–present) were referred to by Joseph Rock (1947) as the Na-khi; the contemporary Mosuo of the Yongning area (officially referred to as the Yongning Naxi, and sometimes also as the Naru, Naze, or Na by various scholars) were referred to by Rock as the Hli-khin.

# **LOCATION AND LINGUISTIC AFFILIATION**

The Lijiang basin has historically been the geographical, political/administrative, economic, and cultural center of the Naxi. The town of Dayanzhen (referred to by outsiders as Lijiang) is located at the center of the 2,400 meter Lijiang basin at the base of the spectacular 6,300 meter Jade Dragon Snow Mountain. Numerous villages surround Dayanzhen, and the Naxi area extends to the north, northwest, and south of the Lijiang basin. Dayanzhen serves as both the county seat for the Lijiang Naxi Nationality's Autonomous County and as the seat for the larger Lijiang Prefecture (which encompasses a total of four counties). The Lijiang area is located in the northwestern corner of Yunnan Province, adjacent to ethnically Tibetan areas in the province's Himalayan sweep toward Tibet. Yunnan is located in the southwesternmost corner of the contemporary PRC. The first language of most Lijiang basin Naxi residents is *Naxi-hua*, a Tibeto-Burman language, though most basin Naxi who have come of age since 1949 have acquired the western Yunnan dialect of Mandarin through the schools as they have grown up.

# **OVERVIEW OF THE CULTURE**

Naxi are the predominant "nationality" of the Lijiang basin and of the larger county, constituting approximately 250,000 of the county's 300,000 residents. As of 1990, Dayanzhen had a population of approximately 60,000. In order to understand Naxi identities and therapeutic practices both prior to and since 1949, however, it is critical to note that not only has the Lijiang basin been the center of Naxi culture for centuries, but it has also been an arena of longstanding engagement between basin Naxi and the Chinese state—the latter encompassing both state policies and Chinese popular culture practices. Thus, while "Naxi culture" is the hegemonic culture of the Lijiang basin, at the same time it has been shaped in many arenas—including the arena of therapeutic practices—by several centuries of influence from Chinese society.

Historically, Naxi are believed to have originally been a Qiang people from the Qinghai Plateau, who migrated to the Lijiang area approximately 1,400 years ago. Beginning in the Yuan Dynasty (1206–1368 CE), the Naxi "kingdom" entered into a tribute relationship with the Chinese state under the *tusi* system; this marked the formalization of a two-tiered structure of elites and commoners within Naxi society. During the Ming Dynasty (1368–1644 CE) and the Qing Dynasty (1644–1911 CE), basin Naxi sociocultural identities were influenced by the inmigration of Han Chinese soldiers and other Han settlers from areas such as Nanjing, with whom basin Naxi apparently frequently intermarried. The Lijiang area was formally incorporated into the Chinese state under the system of "regular government" in 1723. To a degree under the Republican state, but of special note under the Socialist (i.e., post-1949) state, basin Naxi have been strong adherents to the official/Chinese state status quo.

With respect to economic practices, historically most Naxi were agriculturalists and pastoralists. Wheat, corn, and various legumes have long served as the primary basis of basin Naxi diets, and the raising of horses, oxen, and pigs has also long been central to the village-based Naxi economy. For contemporary basin residents, the primary salient social distinction is along lines of urban versus rural/town versus village residence (as is the case throughout the PRC). Dayanzhen has for centuries been an important stop on the trade route between Lhasa (in Tibet) and Kunming (the provincial capital of Yunnan)—many basin Naxi men historically took part in the muletrain-based, long-distance transport trade as well as in a number of other itinerant trades such as leatherworking, and many Dayanzhen Naxi women controlled the local markets with formidable marketing and business skills.

In the post-Mao period (i.e., post-1979), most Dayanzhen residents have had relatively secure employment in state or collective work units (though this is changing). Additionally, many of the town-based enterprises that are controlled by Dayanzhen residents (as opposed to outsiders) are run by Naxi women. Over the past decade, however, the ethnic tourism that has emerged as a booming industry in the Lijiang area has drawn (primarily male) Han entrepreneurs from a number of different provinces to the area. In the context of post-Mao decollectivization, basin village residents for the most part rely upon their own family labor for their livelihood—primarily in terms of agricultural labor, but also in terms of wage-labor opportunities in village industries and via migration to Dayanzhen and other urban centers throughout Yunnan, Sichuan, and the PRC in general.

Graduates of Dayanzhen high schools compete with top students throughout the PRC for admission to provincial and national level institutions of higher education. Basin Naxi males in particular have historically sought to associate themselves with the Chinese state; since 1949, Communist Party membership has been an important marker of social status for Naxi men.

#### **The Context of Health 785**

Patrilineal descent, patrilocal postmarital residence, and (patrilineal) ancestor worship continue to be practiced by both village and town Lijiang basin Naxi residents (in contrast to the system of matrilineal descent and "walking marriage" of the Mosuo). Prior to 1949, arranged marriages were also the norm, and older Naxi women describe their pre-1949 lives as "terribly bitter." Dayanzhen Naxi women have an advantage over village Naxi women in that they do not "marry out" of their natal villages, and they are able to utilize this advantage to maintain their childhood social networks and enhance their entrepreneurial talents as small business managers.

In addition to the neo-Confucian practices that basin Naxi incorporated in their formal and informal encounters with the Chinese state, basin Naxi culture has historically been influenced (at various historical moments) by Buddhism in both Chinese and Tibetan (Nyingmapa) forms, by Daoism, by Tibetan Bon practices, and by a variety of Chinese popular cultural practices. For ethnographically-based research on the Lijiang Naxi, refer to Chao, 1995, 1996, 1999; Goullart, 1955; Hansen, 1999; McKhann, 1992, 1995; Mueggler, 1991; Rees, 2000; Rock, 1947, 1963, and White, 1993, 1997, 1998a, 1998b, 1999, 2001. For ethnographically based research on the Mosuo, see He, 1994, 1999; Mathieu, 1996, 1998, 2000; Rock, 1947; Shih, 1993, 1998, 2001; Walsh, 2001a, 2001b; Weng, 1993; and Yan, 1982.

# **THE CONTEXT OF HEALTH: ENVIRONMENTAL, ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND POLITICAL FACTORS**

## **Epidemiological Profile**

According to official PRC Public Health Bureau representations, infectious diseases of all varieties were of dire proportions in the pre-1949 basin, and poverty insured that much of the population was particularly susceptible to them. The relatively dramatic transformations in the epidemiological profile of the basin over the past several decades are undoubtedly due to the vigilant vaccination system that has been put into place in both urban and rural contexts since 1949, along with the overall increase in the standard of living for the majority of basin residents since 1949. These shifts in the overall epidemiological profile occurred in spite of the large-scale starvation and malnutrition experienced primarily by basin villagers during the Great Leap Forward (GLF— 1958–61). In basin villages, virtually every family lost at least one or two members during the GLF due to starvation and malnutrition—a famine (provoked primarily by Maoist policies) that was far worse than any in villagers' memories. (See Mueggler, 2001.)

In the contemporary basin, the most common afflictions vary between town and village contexts, but colds, influenza, and stomach problems are common among all ages in both contexts; coughs, pulmonary infections, and both gallstones and kidneystones are common among older basin residents; rheumatoid arthritis, gynecological disorders, high blood pressure, chronic headaches, and "neurasthenia" are particularly common among middleaged and older Naxi women (see below). During the summer months in the villages, dysentery is common among villagers of all ages, though especially among young children; intestinal worms are also common among young village children during the summer.

Overall, while infectious diseases such as hepatitis A and tuberculosis are common (as elsewhere in the PRC), the epidemiological profile in the Lijiang basin, and throughout most of the PRC, is closer to that of a "developed" rather than a "developing" country. The widespread PRC practice of using only boiled water for drinking and cooking (in addition to improved standard of living and vaccination factors) can be credited for this. However, in basin villages the use of human waste for fertilizer, the lack of physical containment of poultry and livestock, and the lack of screens are important factors influencing the spread of infectious disease by flies and other vectors. Limited access to bathing opportunities in basin villages is also a factor that influences a number of afflictions (including vaginal infections). See below for discussion of risk factors for HIV/AIDS and hepatitis B.

## **Environment/Global and Local Factors Influencing Health**

Environmentally, the Lijiang basin does not suffer from the dramatic increases in air pollution, water pollution, and forms of environmental pollution that plague most contemporary PRC cities. However, as noted above, over the past decade, the Lijiang basin has become a prime national and international tourist destination for an estimated million plus tourists annually, and the considerable economic development in the basin has resulted in increased environmental degradation. The town/village divide and the gendered division of labor are the key local factors influencing health (see below).

## **Public Health Infrastructure**

Beginning in the 1950s and the 1960s, the Lijiang basin has benefited from being the location of both countylevel and prefectural-level public health bureaus, clinics, and hospitals established by the Chinese socialist state. In addition to the County Hospital and the Prefectural Hospital, there are also county-level and prefectural-level Hygiene and Prevention Health Stations, Women and Child Health Protection Stations, and Pharmaceutical Inspection Stations. At the county level there is a specialized Chinese Medicine Hospital and a Schistosomiasis Station; at the prefectural level, there is a Hygiene School and a Pharmaceutical Company (the Lijiang area and Yunnan in general being prime areas engaged in the production of herbal Chinese medicine). Public health bureaus that are under the joint administration of the public health system and other government administrative units include the Patriotic Hygiene Movement Committee, the Birth Planning Committee, and the Leprosy (Hansen's Disease) Hospital.

During the Maoist period, particularly during the Cultural Revolution (1966–76), brigade-based clinics served as the first of three tiers of resort, the second tier being commune-based health centers, and the third tier being town-based hospitals. The average brigade consisted of approximately 500 families or 2,000 individuals. These cooperative medicine clinics were (with a few exceptions) dismantled during decollectivization in the post-Mao period. "Integrated Chinese and Western medicine" (see below) was originally implemented as the lynchpin therapeutic practice for cooperative health care.

## **Therapeutic Practices**

Prior to 1949, the primary therapeutic epistemology informing basin Naxi understandings of affliction was the "medicine of systematic correspondence" following Paul Unschuld's (1985) term—the classical text-based humoral therapeutic practice associated with the Confucian state that serves as the theoretical underpinning of the post-1949 socialist Chinese state's formulation of "traditional Chinese medicine" (TCM). The hegemony of this epistemology reflects both the degree of influence of the Chinese state in the Lijiang basin and the significance of this epistemology for the "civilizing project" (Harrell, 1995) of the Chinese state. Some other therapeutic practices existed in the basin as well. These practices for the most part were like popular therapeutic practices in other (Han) parts of Yunnan and China in general. They encompassed fortune telling, the exorcism of ghosts or demons, the retrieval of lost souls (Goullart, 1955), and *gu* witchcraft. Rituals associated with Buddhist and Daoist voluntary associations also factored into basin Naxi therapeutic practices. Neither Tibetan medicine, "Western medicine," nor indigenous Naxi *dongba* or *sanyi* practices played a significant role in pre-1949 basin Naxi therapeutic practices (though *dongba* and *sanyi* practices were influential in other parts of the Naxi area).

In the early 1950s the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) established a distinction between "official" and "unofficial" therapeutic/religious practices. Therapeutic practices designated as official during the Maoist period in the basin as well as throughout the PRC—included four practices, which were identified as "Chinese medicine," "Western medicine," "integrated Chinese and Western medicine," and "folk medicine." All other types of therapeutic practices were officially labeled as "unscientific," "backward," and reflective of the "feudal superstition" associated with the "old society" prior to 1949.

For basin Naxi, this meant that fortune-telling, exorcism of ghosts and demons, retrieval of lost souls, and *gu* witchcraft were no longer etiologies that could be openly acknowledged or strategies of therapeutic resort in which citizens could be openly engaged. It also meant that other ritual practices of various members of basin Naxi society, such as those associated with Tibetan Buddhism, Chinese Buddhism, Daoism, Confucianism, and/or other aspects of Chinese/Naxi popular culture were banned.

"(Traditional) Chinese medicine" (hereafter referred to as TCM), the official PRC practice of Chinese medicine, reflected a reformulated medical practice whereby the medicine of systematic correspondence, the pharmaceutical canon, and a variety of techniques such as acupuncture, moxibustion, and acupressure were standardized and "scientized" (see Croizier, 1968, 1976; Farquhar, 1998; Hsu, 1992; Kleinman, 1980; Scheid, 1995; Sivin, 1987; Unschuld, 1985; White, 1993, 1999, 2001).

The official PRC practice of biomedicine, designated as "Western medicine" (hereafter referred to as WM), was also a Maoist period creation. In the 1950s,

#### **Medical Practitioners 787**

Mao broke with physicians who had been trained during the Republican era in an elite-focussed, urban-based, hospital-centered practice of biomedicine. It was at this juncture that Mao declared TCM a "national treasurehouse," and that biomedicine was re-envisioned, reformulated, and reorganized to enable the new, more pragmatic, broad-based, public health oriented practice of WM.

The aforementioned "integrated Chinese and Western medicine" (hereafter referred to as integrated medicine) emerged as a consciously formulated hybrid medical practice that was introduced by Mao during the Cultural Revolution as the cornerstone of national health policy (see RHCHP, 1977). Ideally, it was to represent a synthesis of the best of TCM and of WM. And although it was initially implemented in both urban and rural areas, it was in fact geared toward the health care needs of the rural areas in particular.

"Folk medicine" was the official category established during the Maoist period to acknowledge medical practices other than TCM and WM. It came to encompass aspects of folk and popular Chinese therapeutic practices (particularly local herbal medicines) that were perceived as relatively "scientific" and therefore as relatively legitimate. In the Lijiang basin, "Naxi folk herbal medicine" was recognized as a form of folk medicine, albeit one described in basin Naxi and state public health discourses alike as "without (its own) theory" (i.e., no theory distinguishable from TCM theory) informing the pharmaceutical usage of its materia medica.

The Maoist period establishment of these four official practices through public health policies and institutions reshaped the contours of the previously existing Chinese medicine and other therapeutic practices in the basin. In Dayanzhen, where most of the public health bureaus, hospitals, and clinics were established beginning in the 1950s, the newly reformulated practices of TCM and WM were the ones with which town residents engaged when they sought health care. As was the case elsewhere during the 1950s and early 1960s in the PRC, Dayanzhen medical institutions operated according to an institutional division of labor between TCM and WM. The Prefectural Hospital and the County Hospital each maintained separate WM and TCM departments that mutually engaged in cross-referrals, but maintained no other coordination. There was additionally the County Chinese Medicine Hospital that engaged solely in the practice of TCM. For the duration of the Cultural Revolution, all three institutions shifted to the revolutionary practice of integrated medicine (indeed, it was counterrevolutionary to do otherwise), but returned to their former institutional division of labor arrangement as soon as the Cultural Revolution began to wind down. In contrast, in basin brigades (now "administrative villages") integrated medicine became thoroughly institutionalized as the prevailing therapeutic practice starting from its implementation in the late 1960s. Rural residents engaged in this new practice that endeavored to combine TCM and WM when they sought out treatment from brigade cooperative health care practitioners.

In the post-Mao period (as was the case during the Maoist period), the four officially recognized therapeutic practices—TCM, WM, integrated medicine, and folk medicine—have continued to be the only therapeutic practices technically regarded as "medicine" in the PRC. While medicine, "hygiene," and public health have remained centerpieces of ongoing PRC discourses of socialist modernity and "culture," however, all four official practices have become more professionalized, "scientized" (in a manner different than the Maoist period), and commoditized in the post-Mao period. Additionally, there has been a post-Mao "reemergence" of certain practices formerly banned as unofficial into the officially tolerated (if not sanctioned) arena of "popular culture." Most prominent among these practices have been fortune-telling and, in basin villages, *gu* witchcraft—both of which reflect long-standing Chinese popular culture legacies.

# **MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS**

Prior to 1949, basin Naxi practitioners of Chinese medicine (namely, the medicine of systematic correspondence combined with Chinese herbal pharmaceuticals, acupuncture, and massage techniques) were virtually all male, and had either acquired their knowledge as apprentices of their fathers or other older male relatives, or through an apprenticeship with a non-related practitioner usually arranged by their parents. They started as young boys and gradually developed expertise over the years through learning from their masters, reading the classic texts of Chinese medicine, and learning through personal experience.

During the Cultural Revolution, the practitioners in the basin who were recruited to staff the brigade clinics and to carry out the practice of integrated medicine were generally from one of three backgrounds. Middle-aged and younger doctors and medical technicians trained in "Western medicine" (sometimes via state medical training schools or universities and sometimes via People's Liberation Army training programs) were "sent down" to the countryside from town and city hospitals and clinics for at least the early years of the Cultural Revolution. Older Chinese medicine practitioners were selected from the brigade itself. They usually came from families that had a multigenerational legacy of practicing Chinese medicine or that at least had a repertoire of secret medical (usually herbal) remedies. The "barefoot doctors," the majority of whom were male, in their twenties, and of "good" political background, were selected at the brigade level as well. It was the barefoot doctors in particular who were targeted to learn the newly minted practice of integrated medicine, but practitioners from all three backgrounds agreed that what they collectively strove to practice was integrated medicine.

By the early 1980s, most of the "Western medicine" practitioners who had been sent down to the villages of the basin at the beginning of the Cultural Revolution had returned to their original town- or city-based clinics and hospitals, and the dissolution of cooperative health care did have an impact on the lives of rural practitioners. Former cooperative health care practitioners were officially re-designated as "village doctors," and they became independent, private practitioners. A national examination system for village doctors was implemented in 1982 and 1983, whereby doctors were to choose and ideally pass either the TCM exam or the WM exam. In the Lijiang basin, while all village doctors eventually took one of these exams, not all of them passed their respective exams. Of the village doctors I interviewed, approximately half had passed one of the exams (basic literacy usually being a problem for many of those who did not). While passing one of the exams generally added to the prestige of a given doctor among villagers, those doctors who did not pass an exam were not stigmatized or prevented from practicing.

As a result of the exams, most basin village doctors presently categorize themselves as either TCM or WM specialists. However, they virtually all refer to the type of medicine that they practice as integrated medicine, just as was the case during cooperative health care. While there have been changes in the rural health care infrastructure, the practitioners for the most part are still the same individuals. And they identify integrated medicine as the prevailing epistemology that informs their therapeutic practice.

**788 Lijiang Naxi**

In the hospital contexts of Dayanzhen (and other cities in China), there is more of a clear-cut division of labor carved out between TCM and WM. Both the Lijiang Prefectural Hospital and the Lijiang County Hospital concentrate most of their space and staff on the practice of WM, and have a relatively small space and staff focused on the practice of TCM (TCM is one department among the rest). In this context, the practice of integrated medicine is restricted to those patients who choose to visit both WM and TCM doctors of their own volition, and to pursue both kinds of diagnoses and treatments simultaneously; although there is a mutual referral system, there is no formal consultation between the concerned TCM and WM doctors who share the same patients.

# **CLASSIFICATION OF ILLNESS, THEORIES OF ILLNESS, AND TREATMENT OF ILLNESS**

In the contemporary basin, the options open to residents with respect to strategies of therapeutic resort are for the most part determined by whether or not they have state jobs. This division breaks down primarily along urban and rural lines: the vast majority of village residents in the Lijiang basin (as throughout the PRC) are not state employees and consequently have no health insurance. Since most villagers also have limited access to cash income, this socioeconomic distinction means that they tend to avoid visits to the clinics and hospitals located in Dayanzhen. Villagers who have average or higher than average incomes will attend the latter clinics only in the event that they have a major illness, or for the birth of a first child. Villagers who have lower than average incomes just let the disease take its course, or have their babies in the village.

For most afflictions in both town and village contexts, depending on the illness, the first resort is usually either to use herbal medicine which one collects oneself, to purchase some medicine (either WM, TCM, or integrated medicine) at the local pharmacy, or to go to the nearest local clinic for an injection (usually of antibiotics) depending on one's resources. While visits to village clinics are on average at least 50% less expensive than visits to town clinics, villagers must use their own hard-toobtain cash, whereas town residents generally pay very little of the cost themselves.

#### **Classification of Illness, Theories of Illness, and Treatment of Illness 789**

Additionally, there is a pecking order among the therapeutic institutions that villagers tend to frequent as opposed to those that members of work units tend to frequent. Most villagers in Lijiang County go to the somewhat less expensive county level institutions, whereas it is primarily members of state work units or those who can afford to pay out of their own pockets who tend to frequent the prefectural hospital. Most villagers complain bitterly about the fact that, since decollectivization, city hospitals and clinics demand payments up front before admitting anyone without health insurance. For most villagers, then, the primary form of medical care available (aside from self-treatment) is from village doctors.

The most common afflictions in basin villages, by the accounts of village practitioners and non-practitioner village residents alike, included colds, influenza, dysentery, parasites, stomach afflictions, gallstones and kidneystones, arthritis, heart disease, tracheitis, and gynecological disorders. The etiologies of these afflictions according to basin village practitioners and lay villagers—are rooted in a variety of factors, including inattention to properties of heat and cold, dryness and wetness, and "wind," and/or inattention to "water–earth relationships," seasonal weather cycles, basin microclimates, one's diet, one's body type, one's emotions, one's gender, and/or one's position in the life cycle. For example, colds are caused by one's inappropriate response to excessive heat or cold in the weather in terms of one's choice of clothing (especially failure to wear enough clothing), or the "hot" or "cold" properties of the food one chooses to eat without consideration for the weather. Influenza is an especially potent form of a cold, which is "infectious" (i.e., defined as being more widespread) during the spring and fall seasons when the weather is particularly prone to changeability. Stomachaches are caused by eating irregularly, exposing oneself to excess cold through work, eating cold food, and drinking cold water, and/or by harboring unhappy feelings. Dysentery is primarily caused by exposure to too much heat, which is the explanation for its prevalence during the period of the Chinese solar calendar known as *san fu tian* (the hottest period of summer); dysentery is also caused by eating too many chili peppers, eating too many kinds of food with oppositional "qualities" (e.g., sour versus sweet, etc.), eating unpeeled fruit, or by eating cold food and drinking cold water. Gallstones and kidneystones are frequently also attributed to excess cold, and/or seen as resulting from many years of stomach problems. Heart disease is caused by chronic illnesses in other parts of the body that spread to the heart. Arthritis is a "wind" affliction caused by exposure to too much dampness, cold, and wind, as well as by exposure to sudden shifts in temperature and by working to exhaustion. Tracheitis and bronchitis are caused initially by exposure to cold and then continual exhaustion from work. Gynecological disorders are generally due to the intrinsically depleted nature ascribed to women's (reproductive) bodies (see below).

The etiologies of these afflictions overwhelmingly reflect a view of disease and illness causality that has been called the "medicine of systematic correspondence" (Unschuld, 1985). The medicine of systematic correspondence has evolved over the past two millennia and has integral links to Confucianism and the official culture of the Chinese state. Yin/yang dualisms in physiological, humoral (e.g., hot/cold, wet/dry, etc.) and other arenas parallel the dyadic relationships upon which Confucianism is premised. "Five phase" (*wu xing*) relationships between bodily organs and a variety of other substances parallel the emphasis on the complex network of relationships intrinsic to the bureaucratic structures of the Chinese state. These dyadic and quinary relationships are replicated at the levels of the individual body/self, the local level society/ environment, and the state/cosmos. The goal for the maintenance of order/health and the avoidance of disorder/ affliction is proper behavior/health care and balance. This discourse of proper behavior and the maintenance of balance reflects, among other things, an emphasis on prevention. Once out of balance, the medicine of systematic correspondence body is in a state of depletion and in need of some "bolstering" to renew its balance.

In addition to medicine of systematic correspondence references, informants sometimes also use germ theory references in their etiological definitions (i.e., in terms of concepts such as bacteria, viruses, and hygiene), but neither are these concepts used in keeping with their strict WM sense, nor are they viewed as primary agents in the cause of the afflictions just described (e.g., as would be particularly notable from a WM perspective in the cases of colds, influenza, dysentery, parasites, or stomach problems).

Many of the afflictions just outlined are treated by Lijiang basin village practitioners primarily with injections of antibiotics, intravenous infusions of glucose water, vitamins, and/or antibiotics, or tablets of WM pharmaceuticals. Some of the afflictions are treated primarily with Chinese medicine pharmaceuticals (which are administered through injections or IV infusions as well as in ways more conventional to Chinese medicine). And some of the afflictions are treated with a combination of both WM and TCM pharmaceuticals and techniques.

In all PRC official medical practices, an analytical distinction is made between the theory associated with a given practice, and the materia medica—or pharmaceuticals associated with a practice. Techniques and substances associated with one practice (e.g., WM) can thus be "detached" and incorporated into another practice (e.g., TCM) without there being a perception that the integrity of a given practice has been violated. This logic also informs the local practice of integrated medicine in the Lijiang basin.

Additionally, when basin village practitioners and lay villagers are asked why they frequently utilize injections and IV infusions (of antibiotics or other substances), they explain that it is important to "bolster one's health." Both injections (usually of antibiotics—or, in other instances, of vaccines) and IV infusions (usually of glucose water combined with supplements such as vitamin C or iron or Chinese medicine infusions) are used to bolster the health of depleted bodies. Thus, with respect to the most common afflictions in the basin, WM treatment techniques and pharmaceuticals are being appropriated into an explanatory model primarily informed by a medicine of systematic correspondence discourse.

In addition to the much more prevalent medicine of systematic correspondence afflictions just addressed, village practitioners and lay villagers alike also refer to a number of afflictions that are much less common but that are highly stigmatized and consequently imbued with great symbolic importance. These afflictions include epilepsy, "madness," "leprosy," and *gu* witchcraft. The explanatory models used to talk about these afflictions reflect the discourses of two therapeutic practices. The first is the longstanding Chinese therapeutic practice of demonic medicine (Unschuld, 1985), in which are rooted concepts of "dirt," "pollution," and the need for the exorcism of malevolent and usually invisible agents. The other influence is WM, from which discourses of germ theory, hygiene, infectiousness, and genetic inheritability have been appropriated. Informants use these same discourses to talk about individuals with non-normative bodies as well.

Epilepsy, for example, is seen as both directly genetically transmitted and infectious. WM notions of germ theory and infectiousness, however, are appropriated into basin Naxi explanatory models of infectiousness that are rooted in both humoral concepts of "bad air" and demonic medicine concepts of malevolent agents. "Madness" is seen as potentially (although not necessarily) both hereditary and infectious. "Leprosy" (Hansen's disease) is regarded, again by basin village practitioners and patients alike, as both genetically transmitted and extremely infectious. "Leprosy" has a long historical record as one of the most stigmatized afflictions in China, and continues to be extremely stigmatized. *Gu* "poisoning" a form of witchcraft that was prevalent in the rural basin prior to 1949, was banned as feudal superstition during the Cultural Revolution, and has undergone a gradual resurgence in the villages of the basin since the beginning of the post-Mao period. *Gu* is an affliction that is first described in the demonological literature of the late Zhou dynasty (770–221 BCE) (Unschuld, 1985). *Gu* transmitability is thus talked about in a discourse of "infectiousness." It is also talked about in a discourse of genetic inheritability since *gu* cultivation was seen as passed through family lines (usually from mother-in-law to daughter-in-law—Diamond, 1988). Finally, as is the case in clinical and popular contexts elsewhere throughout the PRC, basin villagers with bodies that fall outside cultural definitions of "normality" are highly stigmatized. Should they choose to marry and have children, these individuals are generally criticized by their fellow villagers (including practitioners) and sometimes their own immediate families. The stigma draws upon fears of the inheritability of their disabilities.

While this analysis has been based primarily upon research in the village contexts of the Lijiang basin where the practice of integrated medicine is the prevailing epistemology informing therapeutic practices, it is reasonable to assume that this analysis is also reflective of therapeutic practices throughout much of the rural PRC; it is reasonable to make this assumption given the powerful influence of state policies (including cooperative health care and integrated medicine policies) during the Maoist period, and given that no new health epistemologies have been introduced to replace integrated medicine—notwithstanding the dissolution of cooperative health care as a brigadebased system. Additionally, it is important to note that in the town context of Dayanzhen and in the urban context of Kunming (the provincial capital), there is also a hegemony of Chinese medical epistemologies—most specifically TCM—that prevails in popular culture contexts, despite the institutional division of labor between WM and TCM that exists in urban contexts; this analysis is probably also generalizable to much of the urban PRC.

## **Implications for the Spread of HIV/AIDS and Hepatitis B in the PRC**

The implications for these findings with respect to the spread of infectious diseases such as HIV/AIDS and hepatitis B are significant. As is the case everywhere in the world, popular culture and medical culture understandings of affliction and of treatment have profound effects on medical and lay responses to epidemics, and this is certainly the case with the emerging HIV/AIDS epidemic in the PRC. The frequent use of needles for injections of antibiotics that are a routine form of treatment in the basin (and elsewhere in the PRC) for many of the common afflictions described above can be a significant risk factor in the spread of both HIV/AIDS and hepatitis B. In the villages of the Lijiang basin as of 1990 (as was likely the case throughout much of the rural PRC at that time), needles were re-used multiple times for injections, with a ceremonious swish of a cleaning solution employed by village doctors between injections. Disposable needles have gradually become common in urban contexts over the past decade and a half, but the sterility of these needles has been compromised by the quality control issues that plague the contemporary PRC (see, e.g., Kristof, 1993).

# **SEXUALITY AND REPRODUCTION**

It is taken for granted throughout the Lijiang basin, in keeping with the rest of the PRC, that the normative practice is to get married and then produce one or more offspring (depending on whether one is an urban or rural resident). In contrast to the dramatically pro-natalist policies of the Maoist period (Potter & Potter, 1990), since the early 1980s in Dayanzhen (as in other urban PRC contexts) the norm that has been strongly enforced by the government is the one-child policy—notwithstanding the fact that the majority of the population in Dayanzhen are classified as "minority nationalities" (a class of individuals who are theoretically exempted from the one-child policy). In the village contexts of the basin, as in other rural PRC contexts (where 80% of the population resides), there has never been a one-child policy. In basin villages that consider themselves more "cultured" and "advanced," most village families have two children, with the second child usually spaced two to three years after the first child (fines—sometimes considerable—are levied against those who exceed the two-child maximum or have their second child earlier than stipulated by the birth planning policy). In villages that are farther from the reach of the state, more than two children per family is the norm, and birth spacing is ignored.

In some contrast to other parts of the (Han Chinese) rural PRC—most notably southeastern China—not having male offspring to perpetuate the name of the lineage and to provide insurance of care in one's old age (as daughters generally marry out) is not considered to be completely devastating to basin families. Both in basin villages and especially in Dayanzhen, young men are frequently sought to marry into a son-less family and have at least one of their children take the surname of their wife's patrilineage. Nonetheless, the longstanding neo-Confucian ethos of "placing greater emphasis on males than females" does considerably influence the lives of both girls and boys as they grow up in the basin.

Young married women who do not become pregnant are stigmatized (in notable contrast to their husbands) as "without children." Of particular note in both town and village contexts of the Lijiang basin, the "stopping of menses" (i.e., among pre-menopausal women) is a muchcited causal factor cited by medical practitioners in their diagnoses of (female) infertility. How the basin compares statistically with other parts of the PRC is not clear, but basin practitioners attributed the frequency of amenorrhea to the ethos of hard physical labor and to the limited nutrition of most basin Naxi women.

One of the distinctive characteristics of the Naxi of the Lijiang basin—that is, in contrast to most other parts of the PRC—is the division of labor along gender lines. Even before the post-Mao feminization of agricultural labor in the PRC (Bossen, 2002), village basin Naxi women carried out most of the field labor, and both village and town basin women tend to do virtually all of the physical labor for their families. A Naxi woman's prestige is based on her ability to labor for her household, as well as to save and manage money for the household.

It is this ethos of ceaseless work that points to a major faultline between Naxi constructions of gender and the normative constructions of deficient female bodies reflected in pre-1949 neo-Confucian informed Chinese medical notions (Furth, 1986, 1987, 1999) as well as in the public health policies of the socialist Chinese state (including both WM and TCM paradigms). On one hand, Naxi women work in their fields and in their homes everyday regardless of the rain or cold, blatantly ignoring the proscriptions of public health policy. On the other hand, there is nearly universal observance of postpartum "confinement" and special dietary practices among Naxi women in both town and village contexts of the basin (see below). The form and the spirit of Han-derived postpartum practices are observed, but the model of female physiological deficiency upon which this practice is based does not apparently carry over into any of the other practices proscribed by Chinese medical and public health policy.

The model of gender in Naxi society is one in which women are associated with production and men are associated with consumption. Epidemiologically, this dynamic is played out in the basin in the sense that the major chronic afflictions of women are those associated with activities of production. Naxi women, both rural and urban, suffer in highly disproportionate numbers (compared to Naxi men) from rheumatoid arthritis, chronic headaches and other pain, and a condition which they and local practitioners refer to as *shengjing shuairuo*, or neurasthenia (Kleinman, 1986). Naxi men, on the other hand, are plagued by diseases associated with consumption: liver and gallstone or kidneystone ailments from excessive consumption of grain alcohol, heart disease and strokes from excessive consumption of pork fat and meat in general (of which men get choice portions), and lung cancer and chronic bronchitis from excessive smoking. There is also a popular pun according to which the term for "vascular heart disease" is recast as "(government) official heart disease." This relatively new epidemic is ascribed to the consumption of too much rich food and too much grain alcohol among government officials at state-sponsored banquets (the overwhelming majority of whom are Naxi men).

This gendered division of labor also informs birth planning practices in the basin. As is also the case throughout the PRC, in the Lijiang basin, women's bodies are the primary objects of state birth planning policies and the objects of the Women's Federation representatives who monitor them; consequently women in both urban and rural contexts bear the primary responsibility for contraception. Intrauterine devices (IUDs) are the most common birth control technique utilized (approximately 40% of basin women), but many users and practitioners complain of often serious side effects (e.g., infections, bleeding) from these devices. Birth control pills and Depo-Provera type injections are popular methods in the basin (approximately 30% of basin women); condoms are not. Tubal ligation is also a strategy employed by some basin village women (approximately 20%) after their second child, if they have a hospital birth for this child (hospital obstetricians regularly recommend to their clients that they undergo this procedure during their hospital stays following their second birth). This latter strategy is not a popular one, however, as it is believed to weaken a woman's health, and vasectomies are rarely considered as a viable strategy for men for the same reason (see Potter & Potter, 1990). Abortion (which is free) is a common strategy of last resort for contraception.

# **HEALTH THROUGH THE LIFE CYCLE**

In keeping with a medicine of systematic correspondence approach, basin residents and practitioners refer to their own body types as either "fire bodies" (intrinsically "hot"), or "water bodies," (intrinsically "cool"). Additionally, people who are plump are considered to be healthier than people who are thin. Babies' bodies up until their first birthday are considered to be particularly weak, as are women's bodies during the first month after having given birth.

Afflictions are seen as seasonal not only in terms of the annual cycle, but also in terms of the life cycle and gender. Village practitioners and lay informants alike usually present afflictions as "children's diseases," "elderly person's diseases," or "women's diseases." These categories of persons (children, the elderly, and women) are considered to be particularly vulnerable to affliction. In the neo-Confucianism-influenced medicine of systematic correspondence, female bodies are constructed as normatively out-of-balance and depleted (not unlike Victorian era women's bodies). Children in general are considered to be vulnerable, since they "eat too diversely," are always playing in water (therefore exposing themselves to cold), and do not have a regulated lifestyle. The elderly are presumed to be in a vulnerable state because of their advancing age. These divisions along lines of age and gender would seem to imply, by default, that the teenaged to middle-aged male represents the normative body, at least in terms of lower inherent vulnerability to affliction. As noted earlier, children's diseases include colds, coughs, fevers, stomach aches, diarrhea, dysentery, and parasites. Elderly people's diseases usually include colds, tracheitis and chronic coughs, and rheumatoid arthritis. Older

#### **References 793**

women in particular tend to be afflicted by rheumatoid arthritis, and post-menarche women of all ages seem to be afflicted with gynecological diseases, headaches, and neurasthenia.

Most babies in the basin are born between October and March, and health practitioners estimate that 80% of births are between November and February. This is because most young people get married during the Spring Festival (the lunar new year), and get pregnant during the first few months of marriage. Virtually all basin women town and village alike—observe the longstanding Han Chinese tradition of a postpartum period lasting 30 to 40 days (and sometimes as long as 100 days) during which they rest under very proscribed conditions, and are supposed to consume specific "rich" foods.

# **REFERENCES**

- Bossen, L. (2002). *Chinese women and rural development: Sixty years of change in Lu village, Yunnan*. Lanham: Rowman and Littlefield.
- Chao, E. K. (1995). Depictions of difference: History, gender, ritual and state discourse among the Naxi of Southwest China. Doctoral dissertation, University of Michigan.
- Chao, E. K. (1996). Hegemony, agency, and re-presenting the past: The invention of dongba culture among the Naxi of Southwest China. In M. J. Brown (Ed.), *Negotiating Ethnicities in China and Taiwan* (pp. 208–239). Berkeley: Center for Chinese Studies and Institute of East Asian Studies.
- Chao, E. K. (1999). The Maoist shaman and the madman: Ritual bricolage, failed ritual, failed ritual theory. *Cultural Anthropology, 14*(4), 505–534.
- Croizier, R. C. (1968). *Traditional medicine in modern China: Science, nationalism, and the tensions of culture change*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
- Croizier, R. C. (1976). The ideology of medical revivalism in modern China. In C. Leslie (Ed.), *Asian Medical Systems: A comparative study* (pp. 341–355). Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Diamond, N. (1988, January). The Miao and poison: Interactions on China's southwest frontier, *Ethnology* XXVII, *1*, 1–25.
- Farquhar, J. (1994). *Knowing practice: The clinical encounter of Chinese medicine*. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
- Farquhar, J. (1998). Re-writing traditional medicine in Post-Maoist China. In D. Bates (Ed.), *Knowledge and the Scholarly Medical Traditions* (pp. 251–276). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
- Furth, C. (1986). Blood, body and gender: Medical images of the female condition in China, 1600–1850. *Chinese Science, 7*, 43–66.
- Furth, C. (1987). Concepts of pregnancy, childbirth, and infancy in Ch'ing Dynasty China. *Journal of Asian Studies, 46*(1), 7–35.
- Furth, C. (1999). *A flourishing Yin: Gender in China's medical history, 960–1665*. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Goullart, P. (1955). *Forgotten kingdom*. London: John Murray.

- Hansen, M. H. (1999). *Lessons in being Chinese: Minority education and ethnic identity in Southwest China*. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
- Harrell, S. (1995). Introduction: Civilizing projects and the reaction to them. In S. Harrell (Ed.), *Cultural Encounters on China's Ethnic Frontiers* (pp. 3–36). Seattle: University of Washington Press.
- He, Z. (1994). Dui Mosuo Muxi Jiating de zai renshi (Rethinking the Mosuo matrilineal family). In Li Xiaojiang, Zhu Hong, & Dong Xiu Yi (Eds.), *Xingbie Yu Zhongguo (Gender and China)*. Beijing: Shenghuo, Du Shu, Xin Zhi (Life, Schooling, New Knowledge Press).
- He, Z. (1999). *Shengcun he Wenhua de Xuanze: Mosuo Muxizhi Jiqi Xianzai Bianqian (The choice of survival and culture: Mosuo matrilineal system and contemporary change)*. Kunming, PRC: Yunnan Educational Publishing House.
- Hsu, E. (1992). Transmission of knowledge, texts, and treatment in Chinese medicine and qigong: Three Settings in Kunming City, P.R.C. Doctoral dissertation, Cambridge University.
- Kleinman, A. (1980). *Patients and healers in the context of culture: An exploration of the borderland between anthropology, medicine, and psychiatry*. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Kleinman, A. (1986). *Social origins of distress and disease: Depression, neurasthenia, and pain in modern China*. New Haven: Yale University Press.
- Kristof, N. D. (1993). China is trying to stifle scandal over reused hypodermic needles. *New York Times*, May 5, 1993.
- Mathieu, C. (1996). Lost kingdoms and forgotten tribes: Myths, mysteries and mother-right in the history of the Naxi nationality and the Mosuo people of Southwest China. Doctoral dissertation, Murdoch University.
- Mathieu, C. (1998). The Moso Ddaba religious specialists. In M. Oppitz & E. Hsu (Eds.), *Naxi and Moso Ethnography* (pp. 209–234). Zurich: Volkerkundemuseum Zurich.
- Mathieu, C. (2000). Myths of matriarchy, the Mosuo and the kingdom of women. In C. Brewer & A.-M. Metcalf (Eds.), Researching the fragments: Histories of women in the Asian context. Manila: New Day.
- McKhann, C. F. (1992). Fleshing out the bones: Kinship and cosmology in Naqxi religion, Volume One. Doctoral dissertation, University of Chicago.
- McKhann, C. F. (1995). The Naxi and the nationalities question. In Stevan Harrell (Ed.), *Cultural Encounters on China's Ethnic Frontiers* (pp. 39–62). Seattle: University of Washington Press.
- Mueggler, E. (1991). Money, the mountain, and the state: Power in a Naxi village. *Modern China, 17*(2), 188–226.
- Mueggler, E. (2001). *The age of wild ghosts: Memory, violence, and place in Southwest China*. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Potter, S. H., & J. M. Potter. (1990). *China's peasants: The anthropology of a revolution*. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
- Rees, H. (2000). *Echoes of history: Naxi music in modern China*. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- The Revolutionary Health Committee of Hunan Province (RHCHP). (1977). *A barefoot doctor's manual*. Seattle: Cloudburst Press.
- Rock, J. F. (1947). *The Ancient Na-Khi kingdom of Southwest China (Volumes 1 & 2)*. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
- Rock, J. F. (1963). *The land and culture of the Na-khi tribe of the China–Tibet Borderland*. Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner Verlag.