27

# **Agrarian Policies and Their Impact**

*Shubha Pandey*

**I** t is well known that the structure of production preceding independence was colonial, geared to subserve the interests of the former "mother country", England. Under the British, India did develop a stable and strong government but very little effort was made to promote the economic development of India. In addition, the Indian economy was primarily an agricultural and plantation economy, producing and exporting agricultural commodities and raw materials, mainly to Great Britain. Even here, the techniques used were primitive and Indian agriculture presented a picture of backwardness in the international perspective.

One of the most important effects of the British rule in India was the growth of a new land system in India. In the early period of the East India Company's rule, the Company directors were keen on securing the largest possible revenue. This policy was marked by excessive extraction from peasants. Land revenue was a principal source of finance for the Company administration in India and it also satisfied the Company directors in England with larger returns every year from their conquest of India.

In order to bring about stability in agriculture, the British introduced land settlement in 1793. In Bengal and neighbouring areas 'permanent settlement' was introduced. The land raised the status of revenue collectors to that of private landlords. This was called the *zamindari* system and the *zamindar* was required to deposit an enhanced land revenue to the state. Later, the British extended the settlement to other states and created *zamindars* there too but they changed over to 'temporary settlement' under which land revenue could be re-assessed after a period ranging between 25-40 years in different states.

Another land system, which was introduced in Bombay and Madras and subsequently extended to north-eastern and north-western India, was the *ryotwari* settlement under which each peasant holding a plot of land was recognized as the owner-cultivator and made directly responsible to the state for the annual payment of land revenue.

But in both the systems, the land rent fixed were excessive and both the systems were instrumental in the destruction of the organic village community based on who was more interested in squeezing higher land rents that in real agricultural progress. Excessive pressures of population resulting in high demand for land helped the *zamindars* to charge exorbitant rent and numerous other exactions from tenant-cultivators. The result of the whole change in tenant system led to the emergence of a new system of exploitation in agriculture.

But a noteworthy change took place during the years 1850-1947 which gave impetus to the commercialization of agriculture. It aimed at the production of crops for sale rather than for family consumption. This was a deliberate policy worked up under pressure from British manufacturer, industrialist and merchant to acquire more and more of new raw materials for the British industries. By the middle of the nineteenth century, Industrial Revolution had been completed in England. There was tremendous demand for raw materials, especially, cotton, jute, sugarcane, groundnuts for the British industries. By offering a higher bait of market price, the peasants were induced to substitute commercial crops for food crops as the former were paying more than the latter. Consequently, the peasants shifted to industrial crops and in some districts, the movement for the commercial crops became so strong that the peasants started buying grain for their domestic needs. This led to a fall in the production of food and consequently this period is marked by the occurrence of most terrible famines in the economic history of India.

This new land system and the commercialization of Indian agriculture produced very adverse economic consequences on the Indian economy. These influences created "built-in-depressions" in agriculture and were responsible for the occurrence of famines in India.

The partition of the country in 1947 which accompanied political independence broke up the union of two complementary economies of India and Pakistan, created severe problems relating to the sources of raw materials, and upset the whole economic structure of the country. All the factors led to the economic chaos superimposed on the fundamental problems of the poverty of masses.<sup>1</sup>

Under these circumstances, the task before the political elites of Indian National Congress, which took the 'driver's seat in the nation's journey for its tryst with destiny', was to initiate, rather, continue the task of revamping the economic and the economic structure, mainly if not completely, dependent upon agriculture. The daunting task before the state, therefore, was to turn the wheels of agrarian reforms in such a way, that the existing semi-feudal production relations or colonial mode of production<sup>2</sup> which was superimposed on the Asiatic mode of production, could be transformed in such a way that it acted as a catalyst in 'building a socialistic pattern of society'.<sup>3</sup> But what happened after that remains tangibly dichotomous to the original proposition before and after independence. Much gap has been created between the radical commitments embodying populist ideology and the policies implemented.

In the formative years, the policy of the ruling Congress party was guided, rhetorically speaking, with the objective of achieving a 'socialistic pattern of society', for the benefit against all exploitations. In November 1954, Jawaharlal Nehru pressed the National Development Council to adopt this policy as the economy's goal after declaring: "the picture I have in mind is definitely and absolutely a socialist picture of society". He, of course, said: "I'm not using the word in dogmatic sense, but in the sense of meaning largely that the means of production should be socially owned and controlled". In January 1955, the Indian National Congress at its Avadi session (1955), and Nagpur session (1959) passed almost the same resolution. The Indian Parliament, too, 'adopted the goal of a socialist pattern' in December 1955. But, later, it became apparent that the ruling party was not in favour of outright rejection of an economic system based on private enterprise; rather it promoted an important role for the state in securing social justice and economic growth within the context of a capitalist economy. This dualism between the means and the end found its place because the ruling elites wanted to carry India along with an independent capitalist path of development with the assumption that to promote the much needed industrial growth, agricultural productivity had to be boosted up. A move had also to be made towards an effort to penetrate the rural areas with a view to creating an integrated national market. For this, the pre-capitalist relation in the countryside, aided and abetted by imperialism had to be dissolved. Thus, the socio-economic reforms were born out of an ideological concept of removing feudalism for the smooth development of capitalism.<sup>4</sup>

The problem, however, which came as a serious challenge before the state was related to productive forces and production relations in Indian agriculture. Productive forces in Indian agriculture at the time of independence were very backward. As relating to production relations, 40 to 45 per cent of the cultivated land under the direct control of the semi-feudal system of *zamindari.* In the region of *ryotwari,* the influence of moneylenders was visible. Moreover, with the passage of time, the whole hierarchy of parasitic elements was formed who appropriated the surplus produce. Daniel Thorner, therefore enumerates the following structure in rural society: (1) landlord; (2) permanent tenant (75-100 years); (3) protected tenant (6 and more years); (4) share-cropper; and (5) agriculture labourers. So the semi- feudal system had its components of (1) extensive spread of share cropping; (2) permanent indebtedness of small peasants; (3) lack of indebtedness of small peasants; (4) lack of access of small peasants to the rural market; (5) static production function with a low potential for internal growth. Moreover, more than half of the land-holdings were very small. Obviously, therefore, must of the peasantry lived under slavery conditions or found work in the bigger holdings. At the same time, however, approximately 2/3 of the land area was held by economically viable holders. So, it is said that though India at the time of Independence was a land of small peasants, it was not a country of small holdings.

The Indian leadership decided to tackle the agrarian problem on the basis of the recommendations made by Kumarappa Committee of the Indian Congress which gave its report in 1949. It propounded the slogan 'land to the tiller'. The committee's recommendations included:

- 1. Eradicating the quasi-feudal social relations and economic institutions that dominated rural India;
- 2. Redistributing land to actual cultivators;
- 3. Providing various government-funded 'community developed' services in an effort to promote the development of a 'progressive peasant';
- 4. Increaing the production of food grains; and
- 5. Commuting of rent from kind to cash.

Owing to the commitment to democracy the recommendations, therefore, excluded the nationalization or compulsory collectivization of land on the Soviet or Chinese model. But neither could the free market approach or the North American model be adopted, under which invariably and inexorably, the small landholders would have been left on the streets. However, the whole programme seemed to reflect the interests of the development of capitalist relations based on peasant proprietorship.

## ❑❑ **Agricultural Policy and Land Returns**

Over the years, the policies of the agricultural sector have gone through the following distinct phases:

#### **First Phase**

The First phase, or the agricultural strategy of the Nehru era laid emphasis on advancing social justice and equity among agricultural producers and increasing agricultural production without diverting resources from the priority goal of the creation of basic and heavy industry. This was to be done mainly through agrarian legislations. As a result, since 1950, following laws were enacted in various states.

#### *Abolition of Intermediaries*

The *zamindari* system was first to go under these reforms. However, there were few hurdles in this regard, such as, (1) the problem of achieving a centralized control and direction because the entire field of agriculture was state subject; (2) the problem of bringing the actual owners of lands into the direct relationship with the state; and (3) the problem relating to compensation. A number of court cases, therefore occurred between the state and the intermediaries,<sup>5</sup> and, finally, Article 81 of the constitution had to be amended before land reform legislation could proceed further.<sup>6</sup>

Despite these problems the *zamindari* system was abolished and about twenty million peasants more or less liberated from feudal oppression. But, at the same time, they were also permitted to retain considerable resources as "land for personal cultivation". Ironically, therefore, instead of transferring land to tillers, the *zamidars* were given the status of tillers of soil.

Moreover the colossal amount of compensation already paid in cash to the exintermediaries formed an important component of the capital which was later invested in profit-oriented intensive activities like rice mills, refrigeration centres, etc. Thus, the policies helped them in attaining a new social status of rural entrepreneurs. In practice, therefore, the spread of capitalist production was seen as a sort of a basis for the programme. And, the reason for this may be seen in the understanding of Indian bourgeoisie that without the creation of the upper class peasantry in the village it would be in isolation. Therefore, there was an attempt to decisively push the landlords who remained after the reforms towards capitalist development. Commenting upon this aspect of the reforms, G.S. Kotovsky observes:

"The main result of the agrarian was a relative betterment of the atmosphere in the village (as compared to the colonial period), which was achieved as a result of clearing the drag of the upper tier of the feudals and bringing big masses of tenants in direct relationship with the state. In this was expressed the wider influence of reforms on the growth of peasant capitalism".<sup>7</sup>

Rudolph and Rudolph also came to the conclusion that:

"the abolition of intermediaries transformed agrarian relations by shifting the locus of rural power from feudal landlords to marketoriented independent cultivators". Further, they add that "marginal tenants, dwarf holders, and agricultural labourers did not benefit from intermediary abolition. Change occurred at the top and near the top of the agrarian pyramid."<sup>8</sup>

#### *Tenancy Reforms*

Tenancy reforms were intended to abolish tenancy by conferring the right of ownership in land on those who cultivate it on lease, and on share-croppers in respect of getting them due share or benefit of produce from cultivation of lease in land. The real objective, however, behind tenancy reform was to promote social justice through growth. But, these reforms practically did not yield any significant result because of the enforcement of laws: (1) structural forces and (2) the existence of legal flaws in tenancy acts.

The first may be explained in terms of the normative structure of tenancy reforms (which is equally true of the other agrarian policies) in the context of the share of landowning class of the rural population in the political power structure of rural India. The large farm-owing class of the rural population has a distinct place and a major share in power-structure of the country has been a powerful institutional force to reckon with. It creates a built-in-leakage at the level of policy formulation as well as implementation which acts as a formidable anti-land reform hurdle. Again, the existence of legal flaws in tenancy acts show the influence of vested interests in the policy structure to work for a dilution or subversion of the policies.

#### *Land Ceiling*

The land reform policy in India envisaged that beyond a certain specific limit, all lands belonging to the landlords would be taken over by the states and allocated to small proprietors or else to landless labourers. The idea of an upper as well as lower limit for individual farming could be traced in the recommendations of the Congress Agrarian Reforms Committee. Ironically, however, the First Five-Year Plan did not support the idea on the basis of the conviction that it would lead to small and uneconomic holding which is the root cause of many difficulties in the way of agricultural holdings.<sup>9</sup> Factually, however, it was not until the middle of the 1960s that serious attempt was made to bring in laws limiting landed property. Since then, the states have passed special legislation related with ceilings on holding from time to time. However, due to several factors, such, for example, as the lack of requisite political will, the apathy of administrative machinery, the apathy of the poor peasants, tenants, and landed labourers to press the government from below for distributive justice, and the deliberate built-in legal flaws, etc., it could not attain the desired objective.

But long before the ceiling was established, there was a chain reaction of fictive transfer of land. The magnitude of the landed property was reduced by its nominal hand-over to other members of the family or relations. As a result, there were no radical changes in agrarian structure. Till today less than one million hectares of land has been redistributed. But here it must be noted that, though this measure did not change the structure of land use, it facilitated the creation of a climate which made it difficult to consolidate landed property.

#### *Community Development*

The concept of community was introduced in the early 1950s keeping in mind two basic objectives. First of all, the bureaucracy inherited from the British were attuned to realize functions of law and order and collection of taxes. It therefore, naturally could not mobilize the people for implementation of various reforms. There was also a need for developing village life in the process of land reforms. The basic purpose, however, was on the creation of a liaison between the government and people and also in explaining to people that the government is an agent for bettering economic and social life. As Rudolph and Rudolph observed: "Nehru and the planners seem to have thought the introduction of an additional layer of administration… the community development programme initiated in 1952 and supplemented by non-official leadership would be able to inspire, organize, and manage the collective transformation of Indian agriculture." The concrete elements of the programme included: (1) securing mass participation in development programmes; (2) giving government subsidies and technical aid to the villages; (3) decentralization of power with the objective of democratization of the village community; and (4) introduction of a complex approach to the question of village renaissance.<sup>10</sup>

#### *Cooperative Farming*

The community development programme was followed by the concept of cooperative farming, especially after the Nagpur session of Indian National Congress in 1955. The proposal was opposed as a basis for mandatory legislation by advocates of peasant proprietorship like Charan Singh in their paranoia against collective farming. The idea behind the concept was to achieve productivity via cooperative joint farming in which farmers were to retain their property rights and to get a share from the net produce in proportion to their land. However, this concept, too, could not produce the desired result as it was sabotaged by a built-in structure to suit the interests of big farmers in two ways. First of all, they divided their large holdings among relatives or even among fictitious individuals, and then pooled them together, thus avoiding the possible dispossession of land. Further, they got preferential treatment from the government particularly with regard to large, long-term loans for capital investment because they only had the assets required for getting credit assistance. Therefore, this concept also could not make a frontal attack on the existing inegalitarian economic structure.<sup>11</sup> Commenting upon its operational drawbacks Gunnar Myrdal vehemently condemned the misuse of cooperative farming to subserve the ends of rural aristocracy:

"Many urban landowners, in particularly, regard this system as a convenient device for converting share-croppers into wagelabourers, and, hence, a means whereby absentee owners of even relatively small pieces of land can-without giving up their absenteeism-reap gains from agricultural modernization that are unobtainable when land is cultivated by share croppers. They can count on receiving the benefits of the preferential treatment and subsidies offered to cooperatives by governmental agencies. It seems probable that their advantages are a major part of the explanation why absentel landowners can be found to support the cooperative farming idea. But, there are other reasons as well. Among them, the

#### **484** ✽ CHAPTER 27

fact that land pooling in cooperatives was expected to protect them against land reform measures, as cooperative farms are usually exempt."<sup>12</sup>

Thus, in the name of cooperatives, actually joint stock farming was to be encouraged a concomitant of capitalist agriculture.

#### **Second Phase**

This phase can be termed as an era of technological determinism/green revolution. Strictly speaking, this phase of agricultural development cannot be analysed as land reform measures, rather as an agrarian strategy which was committed to increase the agricultural production for self-reliance through new technological inputs, and increased investment in agriculture. It had two important dimensions: on the one hand, it was symbolic of the failure of the aim of land reform measures to bring about structural change in order to increase agricultural productivity; on the other hand, it was a cumulative consequence of the land reform measures, *viz.,* the abolition of *zamindari* having led to the birth of rich peasants and introduced of capitalist growth in agriculture.

Moreover, the new strategy grew out of a series of independently caused but conjuncturally related events: the death in May 1964 of Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru, the primary advocate of the industrial strategy, and his replacement by Lal Bahadur Shastri, more a country than a city man; the 1965 Indo-Pakistan and Vietnam wars that led the United States President "Lyndon Johnson to put Indian food supplies on a short and arbitrary tether; World Bank and United States bargaining with the Government of India that linked increased investment in agricultural programmes… to the availability of increased foreign aid for planned investment and for meeting balance of payment problems; disappointment with the capacity of the industrial strategy to address the problem of rural poverty by generating large increase in employment; and the timing of scientific and technological breakthrough, particularly the adaptation to Indian conditions of new high-yielding varieties of seeds, such as dwarf wheat, initially bred in Mexico." Thus, confronted with the above-mentioned circumstances, the government shifted emphasis from institutional change to the technological upgrading of agriculture.<sup>13</sup>

The new approach was exemplified by the Intensive Agricultural Districts Programme (IADP) adopted in the 1960s which sought to concentrate efforts to increase productivity by the greater use of fertilizers, pesticides, high-yielding variety seeds, technical assistance, etc., in one pilot district in each of the Indian states with assured water supply: There was a hope that these districts would, with the passage of time, become poles of growth from which gradually impulses of development would be spread to other regions of the country.

The programmes launched during this stage were explicitly designed to allocate scarce agriculture resources to better-off regions and better off farmers capable of producing marketable surpluses in all-out effort to increase output with little regard for distributional consequences. At the same time, the farmers producing marketable surpluses had been assured of incentives prices so that they made the surpluses available for meeting the urgent needs of the urban population.

The major achievement of the new strategy is the boost in the production of major cereals, *viz.,* wheat and rice. Though part of this increase can be attributed to an extension of the agricultural area, the yield per acre rose as well to another record high of approximately 100 per cent.

But the gains of this Green Revolution has implied certain costs in economic, social and political. Benefiting mainly the better-off farmers, this development has accentuated the growing inequality in the rural sector, This is also true in the case of Ludhiana, which, most of the time is cited as a sample of success of the Green Revolution. Studies by Franchine R. Prankel<sup>14</sup> show that even in Ludhiana, where 80 per cent of landholder hold farms of less than 8 acres, the bottom 20 per cent, i.e.*,* those with holdings of 10 acres or less, have experienced a serious relative deterioration in their economic position for want of sufficient capital. The bulk of credit from all sources went only to potentially viable and credit-worthy farmers who formed a very small minority. From this study of Green Revolution, V.K.R.V. Rao concluded:

"It is now well known that so-called Green Revolution which helped the country to raise its foodgrains has also accompanied by a widening of the range of inequality in rural incomes, the loss of their status as tenants by a number of small farmers, and the emergence of social and economic tension in the countryside…. The challenge which India agriculture faces is not only of production problems. We should not forget the human and social implication of agricultural development."<sup>15</sup>

In the socio-political sphere, the Green Revolution opened up a Pandora's box—its very success had produced a number of new problems which were far more subtle and difficult than those faced during the development of new technology. The most disturbing phenomenon was a loss of peace in rural India. Unlike the traditional village-based conflicts between factions within dominant landowning groups, which involved localized symbols of power and prestige, the new conflicts emerged along class lines. The manifestations of these conflicts took several forms, *viz.,* Gandhian satyagraha, land-grab marches, forceful seizure of harvested crops, unionized demands for higher wages and at times physical annihilation of big landowners (*e.g.,* the Naxalbari movement of 1967); these specific forms varied depending on the objective situation.

From an analysis of the socio-economic relationships that developed with the introduction of new technology, one may conclude that, for the success of Green Revolution and its spread without social tension, it would be advisable-rather it is absolutely necessary-to make a frontal attack on semi-feudal land-relations. In other words, genuine land reforms must go hand in hand with technological improvement to bring the benefits of the Green Revolution from the social point of view.

### **Third Phase**

During this phase, the reforms were based on basic needs and income redistribution approach. This approach was to outcome of two basic considerations of compulsions, political and economic. As far as the political aspect is concerned, Indira Gandhi (who had succeeded Lal Bahadur Shastri as Prime Minister after his sudden death in 1966) took a leftist ideological and policy position to outwit both the opposition parties as well as the breakaway Congress group. Thus, she tried to spread the message among the masses that she was the only champion of the masses of the poor whereas her opponents were for the propertied and privileged sections of the society. And, this political compulsion, which led her to use the rhetoric of *garibi hatao* paid her rich dividends in the form of absolute majority for her party in the midterm parliamentary elections on March 1971.

As far as economic compulsions for the adoption of the new approach are concerned, the fact remains that by the end of the 1970s hectic discussions and seminars went on in India and abroad around the priorities of development. The Nehru-Mahalanobis model of the Indian strategy of development came under fire since it was not in a position to solve the basic economic questions which stood before the Indian people. Poverty grew and unemployment was not liquidated. Thus, the solution proposed by the economists in India as well as the International Labour Organization at the conference on employment (1976), which was also supported by the agencies like International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development came to be known as the Basic Needs Strategy. This concept emphasizes the satisfaction of basic needs as a final aim of development and creation of employment as a means for the satisfaction of basic needs. So, the emphasis of the policy was to direct investment for seeing improvement in quality of life. The strategy, therefore, was to concentrate on the following points:

- 1. An appreciable increase in employment and consequently income of groups of people who in statistical terms were identified as poor.
- 2. Increase in investment in traditional agriculture and removal of bottlenecks in it through the democratization of credit and financial institutions.
- 3. Securing the main consumer goods for the whole of the population.
- 4. Reduction in inequality between various groups of population in the distribution of goods and services.

This policy was operationalized by generating two policy streams. First of all, the Central government increased *ad hoc* transfer payments to the state governments for famine and drought relief. Secondly, it seems that anticipating the future change in policy by the Janata government, programmes were launched which were specifically targeted to employment and creation for poor constituencies. These included Small Farmers Development Agency (SFDA), Marginal Farmers and Agricultural Labourers' Scheme (MFALS), the Drought Prone Areas Programme, Rajasthan's *Antyodaya* Programme, Maharashtra's Employment Guarantee Scheme, and the Centre's Food for Work Programme, etc. The objective of these programmes, therefore, ranged from short-term (*e.g.,* the politically hinged emergency relief measures) to long-term (*e.g.,* the creation of production assets and skills). The objective, however, was to lift increasing numbers above the poverty line and to enhance rather than waste the productive capacities of the poor.

Rural employment and increased investment in agriculture were to succeed after previous strategic during the Janata rule. In. fact, it was the continuation of its preceding strategy except that instead of using populist rhetoric, it decided to attack poverty primarily through generating employment opportunities and by providing productive assets to the rural poor. This was to be achieved through enhanced investment in those agricultural activities which would be pro-rich peasants. Therefore, it was intended to polarize, rather than harmonize, the interests of agrarian classes and interests. Though in 1980, the Janata government was replaced by the Congress (I), it did not make any significant shift in the programmes. In fact, it continued with the same agricultural programmes but without their labels.

The agrarian strategy after the fall of the Janata government came to be called 'integrated agrarian development'. Under this programme the strategy and methodology of a faster development of productive forces were based on:

- 1. Increasing production and productivity in agriculture and connected sectors;
- 2. Increase in the income of lower state of the population through the development of primary, secondary, and tertiary sectors;
- 3. Increase in the necessary amount of credit so as to support rural poor;
- 4. Support through the market for rural poor so as to ensure them against exploitation during exchange;
- 5. Minimum needs and closer contacts between science and production.

The objective, therefore, of the agrarian programme was to:

- 1. Speed up the tempo of implementation of land reforms;
- 2. Expand the horizons of new technology for a majority of peasants, regions, and crops, and also increasing attention towards supplying the means of production:
- 3. Transform agriculture;
- 4. Expand the scientific area of land on the basis of ecology, energy, economy, and conservation;

- 5. Support the interests of the producers and consumers with the help of measures in the field of production and distribution in an integrated form; and
- 6. Struggle with rural employment under a national programme of agricultural employment.

This was intended to help those strata of the rural poor who in general depend on selling their labour-power, and, hence, are condemned to poverty-stricken existence.

However, the above objectives and strategies, which more or less had been the hallmark of agrarian policies during the last decades, clearly reflect that, in essence, the talk is about new agrarian strategy which foresees no fundamental measures in the field of production-relations. But, it must also be noticed that there was some appreciable shift on the problems of landless agricultural workers and marginal holdings. The strategy, basically, has two lines of attack. This is, first, the continuation of the attempts to increase the horizons of modem agriculture with emphasis on technoeconomic methods, and, secondly, an attempt to some extent to tone down the inevitable social problems with the help of such half-measures as the programme of rural employment, etc.

#### **Fourth Phase**

Since the early nineties, the agrarian policies witnessed the introduction of economic reforms by placing greater reliance on the market for allocation of resources, emphasizing private initiative and encouraging domestic and global competition. These reforms aimed at setting the stage for gradual liberalization, first as a part of stabilization policy, which was important to correct the distortions in key economic areas and secondly to bring in structural adjustments. The type of policy changes suggested and implemented with the adoption of NEP 1991 (though not wholeheartedly) include removing restrictions on the movement of agricultural commodities, reforms in domestic trade and stocking policies, liberalization of trade in agricultural commodities, abolition of quantitative restrictions and substitution whichever necessary, by export and import tariffs revamping public distribution system and gradual removal of input subsidies.

The most striking feature of this phase reflected in the announcement of a New Agrarian Policy on July 28 2000, which aims to attain, over the next two decades:

- 1. A growth rate of 4 per cent per anum in the agriculture sector.
- 2. Growth that is based on efficient use of resources and conserves our soil, water and bio-diversity.
- 3. Growth with equity, i.e., growth which is widespread across regions and farmer; growth that is demand driven and caters to domestic market mad maximizes benefits from export pf agricultural products in the face

of the challenges arising from economic liberalization and globalization; and

4. Growth that is sustainable technologically environmentally and economically.

The main feature of the National Agriculture Policy is as under.

- 5. Privatization of agriculture and price protection of farmers in the post-QR (Quantitative Restrictions) regime would be the part of government's strategy to synergize agricultural growth. The focus of the new policy is on the efficient use of resources and technology; adequate availability of credit to farmers and protecting them from seasonal and price fluctuation.
- 6. Private sector participation would be promoted through contract training and land leasing arrangements to allow accelerated technology transfer, capital inflow, assured markets for crop productions especially of oil seeds, cotton and horticultural crops.
- 7. Private sector investment in agriculture would be encouraged, particularly in areas like agricultural research, human resource development, post-harvest management and marketing.
- 8. In view of dismantling of QRs (Quantitative Restrictions) on imports as per WTO agreement on agriculture the policy recommended formulation of commoditywise strategies and arrangements to protect farmers from the adverse impact of undue price fluctuation in the world market and promote exports.
- 9. Government would enlarge coverage of future markets to minimize the wide fluctuations in commodity prices as also for hedging their risk. The policy hopes to achieve sustainable development of agriculture, create gainful employment and raise standards of living.
- 10. The policy envisages evolving a "National Livestock Breeding Strategy" to meet the requirement of milk, meat, egg and livestock and to enhance the role of draught animals as a source of energy for farming operations.
- 11. Plant varieties would be protected through a legislation to encourage research and breeding of new varieties. Development of animal husbandry, poultry, dairy and agriculture would receive top priority.
- 12. High priority would be accorded to evolve new allocation-specific and economically viable improved varieties of farm and horticulture crops, livestock species and aquaculture market would be liberalized.
- 13. The restrictions on the movement of agricultural commodities throughout the country would be progressively dismantled. The structure of taxes on foodgrains and other commercial crops would be reviewed.
- 14. The excise duty on materials such as farm machinery and implements and fertilizers used as inputs in agricultural production, post-harvest storage and processing would be reviewed.

- 15. Appropriate measures would be adopted to ensure that agriculture, by and large, remained outside the regulatory and tax collection system.
- 16. Rural electrification would be given high priority as a prime move for agricultural development.
- 17. The use of new and renewable sources of energy for irrigation and other agricultural purposes would be encouraged.
- 18. Progressive institutionalization of rural and credit farm would be continued for providing timely and adequate credit to farmers.
- 19. Endeavour would be made to provide package insurance policy for farmers, right from sowing of crops to post-harvest operations including market fluctuations in the prices of agricultural produce.

#### **Fifth Phase: WTO and Agriculture**

The World Trade Organization, the successor of General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) is a multilateral trade body encompassing rules and disciplines for an orderly world trading system. The initiative towards the formation of GATT and International Trade Organisation (ITO) came during World War II, primarily from the USA. The original idea was to create an ITO, with GATT to be part of it. A draft chapter for an ITO was to be concluded during the late 1940s. Owing to resistance from the US Senate, the ITO never saw the light of the day. Instead, a Protocol of Provisional Application was signed in late 1946 by 23 original members, which became effective on 1 January 1948, ushering in the GATT.

The Government of India signed the Uruguay Round of GATT treaty at Marracas (Morocco) on 15 April 1994 and became a member of World Trade Organization (WTO) without putting up the required resistance for better terms on which India should enter such an agreement. It is directly related to the new economic policy that it adopted for the past few years. In fact, the government had prepared the background of accepting this treaty by implementing many fiscal measures called for under GATT, 1944. To be more specific, the so-called structural adjustment programme of 1991, under the influence of IMF and World Bank, was nothing but an exercise to culminate with the accession to WTO.

The new WTO accord is a momentous and historic achievement because it is believed to funnel \$200 billion to \$300 billion a year into world income through an increase in trade, i.e., more than one per cent of world GNP, over 10 years from 1995. World trade in 1992 was \$7.5 trillion and at the same time world GNP was \$22.5 trillion. It is believed that the agreement will infuse dynamism into the global economy through boosting exports by \$200 billion to \$300 billion in a year, which has considerable implications for India's export. At present, India's share in the world trade is around 0.5 per cent and it is expected that there will be an increase of \$1.25 billion to \$1.5 billion more over a period of next 10 years starting from 1995. It is for this reason that among the developing countries this package agreement has evoked both enthusiasm and anxiety.

The WTO treaty proposes to phase out what is called trade distortions in agriculture and liberalize trade in agricultural commodities. The basic idea of the WTO was to embody the results of tariff negotiations including some general protective clauses which would prevent evasion of tariff commitments. The tariff concessions are linked to non-discrimination through the principle of most-favoured nation treatment. The non-discrimination provides a basis for equal treatment for all contracting parties irrespective of the level of their economic growth. The WTO is a code of rules for international trade as well as a global forum for discussion on world trade matters. More importantly, it dispute settlement mechanism provides a basis for settlement of commercial disputes.

The long-term objectives in the process of reform of trade in agriculture, as spelled out is Punta Del Estate declaration in agriculture is to establish a fair and market-oriented agricultural trading system and to militate reform process through negotiations of the commitment of farm support and disciplines. As is well known, the agricultural sector has been creating grave concern for developing countries as most of the agricultural export is developed the world, in particular. The European Union were subject to variable levels under the common agricultural policy.

Broadly, two types of subsidies are given to agriculture. One is productspecific and the other non-product specific. While product-specific relates to specific terms like tobacco, sugarcane, wheat, etc., non-product-specific subsidies are given to agricultural inputs like water, seeds, fertilizers, agricultural credit, pesticides, etc. The final act stipulates that non-productspecific subsidies will be cut by 10 per cent of that total value of agricultural production.

However, as the costs of subsidies rise, the only way India can continue to remain under this cover is by unilaterally reducing subsidies. Thus the substantial reduction in subsidies that have come about already during the last few years was due to such compulsions of the treaty.

Another important but detrimental effect of WTO on our agricultural sector is related to its provision of market access. (Article 4, Clause 1). Under this provision, irrespective of whether the country requires to import an agricultural product or not, at least 4 per cent of its domestic consumption must constitute its imports.

Those who subscribe to the government view that those percentages are too small to adversely affect our interest should also take into account the following: First of all, only around 20 per cent of our production is marketable surplus. A four per cent of total means, 1/5th of this, which can play havoc with the prices. Secondly, in the base-years of 1986-88, our wheat production was around 50 million tonnes. A four per cent of this is two million tonnes. If this is to be imported on the basis of the difference between the domestic and the imported price of wheat in 1993, then it would amount to a loss of `3340 crore in one year. In 1993 the Government of India imported wheat at the rate of `517 per quintal, while the domestic procurement price was `350 per quintal. This is only for one product. The cumulative effect of all agricultural products would lead to colossal loss, and that too in foreign exchange.

A careful analysis of the provisions of the WTO treaty would reveal that the main impact of this on our agricultural production will be directed more towards the expectations of exports, it is bound to affect the choice of crops that individual farmers will produce. There will be an increasing tendency, therefore, to shift from food grains to cash crops, thus reducing the overall foodgrain production. In countries like India where huge increases in production are required to meet the food needs of a vast majority of our population, such a shift will reduce the availability of food grains for domestic consumption. Moreover, if the government has to maintain even a pretence of a public distribution system, which is fast eroding due to the consequences of the new economic policies, this would have to be done through the import of foodgrains. Further, under the WTO provisions, there are some conditions of the quality of food security in developing countries. Apart from conditions like "transparency" and "nutritional" requirements, these stipulate that the government can hold food-stocks and distribute them only on the condition that the difference between the procurement prices and international market-price, and difference between the issue price through ration-shops and international market-prices are added to the Aggregate Measurement of Support (AMS). AMS is the basis on which 10 per cent cover of subsidy operates. It the AMS crosses 10 per cent of the value of agricultural production, then we cannot continue the existing subsidies. Therefore, in order to remain within the 10 per cent cover, the government expenditure on the public distribution system will have to be drastically restricted.

The overall result of the provisions of the WTO, therefore, would be that the changes in cropping pattern in cash crop may benefit the individual strata of the rich peasant for a temporary period but would be detrimental to the country's overall food security. A classic example is the current soaring of sugar prices. One of the reasons is the shift away from sugarcane cultivation, resulting in sugar prices rising to a phenomenal `20 per kg. Import of sugar became necessary benefiting the MNCs and draining out the foreign exchange. Many foodgrains surplus economies which followed such policies in the past have ended up being importers of food grains to meet the basic requirements. In India, too many economists lament the cumulative effect of the new economic policies and the WTO would lead to a shift in the cropping pattern, a fall in food production and revival the spectre of famine-like situation in the country.

To sum up, we may conclude that no doubt the results of various policies and programmes of the government have been considerable, particularly in the realm of production, but at the same time, it remains an open secret that the fruits of growth have not trickled down to the poorer sections of rural India. And, there is a consensus among the intellectuals that the discontent of the disadvantaged is nearing some kind of ignition point. The old tranquilizers have worn off. Thus, the situation is becoming alarming and the need of the hour is not to disapprove our failure to achieve the desired goals, but to re-think and re-shape our priorities, otherwise it may be too late to keep away the imminent catastrophe, both social and political.

#### **Notes and References**

- 1. "As a result of partition, the Indus valley irrigation system in large measure was ceded to Pakistan. India received 77 per cent of the territory and only 69 per cent of the irrigated area of British India. Also, important centres of production of cotton and jute went to Pakistan". G.N. Seetharam, *Strategy and Tactics of India's Agricultural Development: The Role of the State,* Delhi, Ajanta Publications, 1984, p. 17.
- 2. The specific impact of colonialism on the mode of production in agrarian economies of erstwhile colonies is called the 'colonial mode of production'. Here the appropriation has feudal characteristics and there is closer integration with imperialist countries. Feudalism is at the service of imperialism: in this context it is important to take note of the role of intermediaries between the cultivator and the imperialist state. See Hamza Alvi, 'India and Colonial Mode of Production', *Economic and Political Weekly,* Vol. X, Special Number (August 1975).
- 3. See Maurice Goldier, 'The Notion of the Asiatic mode of production in Marx and Engels'. *Enquiry,* Vol. II, No. 2 (1960). The Asiatic mode of production is distinguished from feudal mode of production, though it has several features of feudal mode of production.
- 4. G.N. Seetharam, *op. cti.,* p. 21; see also, Lloyd I. Rudolph and Susanne Hoeber Rudolph, *In Pursuit of Lakshmi: The Political Economy of the Indian State,* Bombay: Orient Longman, p. 314.
- 5. A detailed study of the court cases has been made by H.C.L. Neerullat, *Land and the constitution of India,* New York, 1970.
- 6. G.S. Kotovsky, *Agrarian Reforms in India, quoted in Seetharam, op. cit.,* pp. 24–25.
- 7. Rudolph and Rudolph, *op. cit.,* p. 315.
- 8. India, Planning Commission, *First Five-year Plan,* 1951, p. 184.
- 9. Rudolph and Rudolph *op. cit.,* p. 317.
- 10. Seetharam, *op. cit.,* p. 27.
- 11. Gunar Myrdal, *Asian Drama,* Vol. II, p. 1350.
- 12. Rudolph and Rudolph, *op. cit.,* pp. 319–320.
- 13. Francine R. Frankel, *India's Green Revolution: Economic Gains and Political Costs,*  Princeton University Press, 1971, p. 4.
- 14. V.K.R.V. Rao, 'New Challenges before Indian Agriculture', *Panse Memorial Lecture*  (April 1974). Quoted in R. Datt and K.P.M. Sundharam, *The Indian Economy,* New Delhi: S. Chand and Company, 1993, p. 507.
- 15. Rudolph and Rudolph, *op. cit.,* pp. 328–329.