the archeologist. In general, diseases seen in bones and mummies constitute a reflection of a certain aspect of the population or society under study and can provide information in the same fashion as do pottery or monumental architecture. On the other hand, different patterns of incidence or manifestation of disease can provide information on the evolution of diseases. Paleopathology adds a critical dimension to our study of human history and evolution in relation to the environment.

### **REFERENCES**

- Allison, M. J., Pezzia, A., Gerszten, E., Giffler, R. F., & Mendoza, D. (1974). Aspiration pneumonia due to teeth—950 AD and 1973 AD. *Southern Medical Journal, 67*, 479–483.
- Aufderheide, A. C., & Rodriguez-Martin, C. (1998). *The Cambridge encyclopedia of paleopathology*. Cambridge, UK and New York: Cambridge University Press.
- Brothwell, D. R. (1972). *Digging up bones: The excavation, treatment and study of human skeletal remains* (2nd ed.). London: Trustees of the British Museum (Natural History).
- Brothwell, D. R., & Sandison, A. T. (1967). *Diseases in antiquity*. Springfield, IL: C.C. Hall.
- Cockburn, A., Cockburn, E. & Reyman, T. A. (Eds). (1998). *Mummies, diseases and ancient cultures*. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- El-Najjar, M. Y., Ryan, D. J., Turner, C. G. II, & Lozoff, B. (1976). The etiology of porotic hyperostosis among the prehistoric and historic Anasazi Indians of Southwestern United States. *American Journal of Physical Anthropology, 44*, 477–487.
- Hart Hansen, J. P. (1998). Bodies from Cold Regions. In Cockburn, Cockburn & Reyman, op. cit., (pp. 336–350).

#### **58 Psychoanalysis and Anthropology**

- Moodie, R. L. (1923). *Paleopathology: An introduction to the study of ancient evidences of disease*. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
- Ortner, D. J., & Aufderheide, A. C. (1991). *Human paleopathology current synthesis and future options*. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
- Ruffer, M. A. (1921). *Studies in palaeopathology of Egypt* (R. L. Moodie, Ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
- Schultz, M. (2001). Paleohistopathology of bone: A new approach to the study of ancient diseases. *Yearbook of Physical Anthropology, 44*, 106–147.
- Spindler, K., Wilfing, H., Rastbichler, E. Zur Nedden, D., & Northdurfter, H. (Eds.). (1996). *Human mummies: A global survey of their status and the techniques of conservation: Vol. 3. The man in the ice*. Vienna: Springer-Verlag.
- Trinkaus, E. (1983). *The Shanidar Neanderthals*. New York: Academic Press.
- Tyson, R. (1997). *Human paleopathology and related subjects: An international bibliography*. San Diego, CA: San Diego Museum of Man.
- Zimmerman, M. R. (2001). The study of preserved human tissue. In D. R. Brothwell & A. M. Pollard (Eds.), *Handbook of archeological sciences* (pp. 249–257). Chichester, UK: Wiley.
- Zimmerman, M. R., & Angel, J. L. (Eds.). (1986). *Dating and age determination of biological materials*. London: Croom Helm.
- Zimmerman, M. R., & Aufderheide, A. C. (1984). The frozen family of Utqiagvik: The autopsy findings. *Arctic Anthropology, 21*, 53–63.
- Zimmerman, M. R., Jensen, A. M., & Sheehan, G. W. (2000). Agnaiyaaq: The autopsy of a frozen Thule mummy. *Arctic Anthropology, 37*, 52–59.
- Zimmerman, M. R., & Kelley, M. A. (1982). *Atlas of human paleopathology*. New York: Praeger.
- Zimmerman, M. R., & Smith, G. S. (1975). A probable case of accidental inhumation of 1,600 years ago. *Bulletin of the New York Academy of Medicine, 51*, 828–837.

# **Psychoanalysis and Anthropology**

#### **Waud H. Kracke**

Anthropology and psychoanalysis have much in common. The ability to listen, for example, is crucial to both disciplines. The approach psychoanalysis takes to mental illness is to listen to the patient and try to understand the structure of his symptoms and the origin of these symptoms in repressed or disavowed desires. The analyst supports the patient's quest to understand the reason these desires were disavowed, in conflicts between the desires and the person's values in the context of a set of

assumptions about life that grew up as a response to childhood experiences. Anthropology is likewise based on listening—listening to a person ("informant" or "collaborator") and trying to understand the structure of this person's system of symbols, including the value system and the root assumptions about reality. Despite obvious differences—the psychoanalyst is responding to an individual patient who came to him for alleviation of personal suffering; the anthropologist is trying to understand

the shared culture of a large number of people—there is also considerable overlap in their concerns. Edward Sapir (1938/1963b), the anthropological linguist who shaped American cultural anthropology in the 1930s, believed that anthropology and psychoanalysis should be united under a common field of "cultural psychiatry."

From the time of W.H.R. Rivers—a British psychiatrist who treated war neuroses with psychotherapeutic methods, contributed to the interpretation of dreams (Rivers, 1917–18, 1923), did the classic ethnography of the Todas, and made significant contributions to the development of social anthropology (Slobodin, 1978) the mutual influence and shared interests of anthropology and psychoanalysis have been great. Following Sapir's lead in bringing the two disciplines together, the psychoanalysts Erik Erikson, George Devereux, and most recently Jacques Lacan and Willy Apollon have made culture and language central to their psychoanalytic thought.

Of special interest to medical anthropology are studies of ritual modes of curing mental illness (shamanism, possession ritual, and others), and rituals that have a prophylactic effect in helping to resolve emotional conflict in situations of vulnerability, such as mourning. One anthropologist/psychoanalyst has applied cultural understandings to effective treatment of psychosis (Apollon, 1991). Several writers have drawn comparisons between the anthropologist's relationship with his or her native collaborators or "informants" and the kind of relationship established in the therapeutic situation. Culture shock is also a concern which was first identified in anthropology and which has important consequences for mental health—whether of the anthropologist in the field, or of the visitor or immigrant to another culture (Kracke, 1987). Also of anthropological interest is the development of psychoanalytic movements in new countries, especially those of the Third World. New cultures may face psychoanalysts with new kinds of personal problems and the culture itself may reshape the central concepts of psychoanalysis as it is practiced and thought about in each country. This may be seen in comparing psychoanalytic movements in different European cultures—the special developments of psychoanalysis in England and in France, for example; but even more, as psychoanalysis has taken root in many Third World cultures, the growth of psychoanalysis in India (Kakar, 1990), Japan (Okonogi, 1978–79), and most recently China.

### **PSYCHOANALYTIC UNDERSTANDING OF RITUAL CURE AND PROPHYLAXIS**

Psychoanalysis, Freud tells us, is a mode of treatment of mental illness, a method on which that treatment is based, and a theory built on the results of that method. Let us begin with the mode of treatment.

If psychoanalysis can provide a treatment that cures neurosis in our own culture, then it must also be possible, using psychoanalytic theory, to understand the successes of native therapies in other cultures. To the extent that shamanic cures (Freeman, 1967; Toffelmeier & Luomala, 1936), healing by curanderos or diviners (Turner, 1961/1972, 1967, chapters 6 and 10), cures of spirit possession by trance, and cures through "sings," or other ritual means are effective in overcoming symptoms psychoanalysis may be able to provide some understanding of their process of cure. In a case I have discussed with David Szanton, a girl was taken to 16 different *babaylan*s (a kind of curer in the Philippines) for episodes of violent symptoms. Only the seventeenth was able to relieve her, at least for a time. She did this by identifying an intense emotional issue in the family that had remained submerged: the mother had had a call to be a *babaylan* but the father would not permit her to do so (Guthrie & Szanton, 1972). Sudhir Kakar (1982, chapters 2 and 3) was able to interview patients visiting a Muslim *pir* (saint) and a healing shrine, to understand their problems and some of the ways in which the cure helped them.

Such cures need not be limited to hysterical or purely psychosomatic symptoms, or illnesses traditionally regarded as having a psychological component. It is becoming increasingly evident that the effective working of the immune system and the body's combating of illness respond strongly to emotional states, so that the seemingly astonishing cures by faith healing or other ritual methods may be attributed, in some cases at least, to the effect of belief on the sick person's ability to combat disease.

Although not generally considered a psychoanalytic anthropologist, Claude Lévi-Strauss has provided the best comparison I know of between healing ritual and the psychoanalytic process, and an excellent formulation of the nature of psychoanalytic treatment. His 1949 article "The Effectiveness of Symbols," gives a brilliant demonstration of the healing effectiveness of a Cuna shamanic

(Lacan, 1953).

ritual to deal with difficult childbirth, and a comparison with psychoanalytic cure. He shows that the Cuna ritual (in Panama) works through reproducing, in a shaman's song, a Cuna mythic landscape, creating an identification between the woman's own internal "landscape" (her birth canal), as subjectively perceived by her, and the cosmological landscape of the myth. By naming the pains to the suffering woman—"presenting them to her in a form accessible to conscious or unconscious thought"—the shaman's song "renders acceptable to the mind pains which the body refuses to tolerate" (Lévi-Strauss, 1963, p. 197). "In our view," Lévi-Strauss concludes, "the song constitutes a *psychological manipulation* of the sick organ, and it is precisely from the manipulation that a cure is expected" (p. 192; italics in original). Conversely, Lévi-Strauss suggests that psychoanalysis works by taking a "personal myth" constructed by the patient from his own past, and recreating it as a new personal myth incorporating previously repressed memories of the patient's. While some psychoanalytic anthropologists object to Lévi-Strauss's reformulation of the psychoanalytic cure (Bernard Juillerat, personal communication), I am not alone in considering it a brilliant formulation of the psychoanalytic process. The French psychoanalyst Jacques Lacan, whose theoretical formulations of psychoanalysis owe a great deal to Lévi-Strauss, borrowed the concept of "the individual myth of the neurotic" in his reformulation of psychoanalytic theory of treatment

A number of psychoanalytic anthropologists have looked at treatments for aberrant states of mind—mental illness—in "primitive" or nonwestern cultures. Anthony Wallace, for example, in several articles discussed traditional Iroquois dream interpretation rituals as a way of dealing with the psychic conflict expressed in dreams. The requirement that the dream be acted out, literally or symbolically, provided a kind of catharsis, he suggested, which prevented the conflicts in the dream from fulminating under repression into a full blown mental disorder. He compared this method to Freud's early "cathartic method" of hypnotic treatment that preceded the full development of psychoanalysis (Wallace, 1958, 1959). Yoram Bilu, an Israeli psychoanalytic anthropologist, has also shown parallels between the interpretations given by an early 20th-century mystic healer in Baghdad, Iraq, and some of Freud's dream interpretations (Bilu, 1979).

## **RITUAL AS PROPHYLAXIS: FUNERALS, MOURNING, AND THE WORK OF REMEMBERING**

Not only rituals that are directed to healing illness, but other more general rituals may have a beneficial emotional or psychological effect on participants. Life crisis rituals and rites of passage deal with important crises or transitions in life which necessarily have personal meaning, and can stir up emotional conflict (Herdt, 1981, 1982). Victor Turner (1967) has written extensively on such rituals, and his formulations on ritual symbols are helpful in thinking about the personal issues dealt with in the ritual as well as the social issues of the transition. An especially helpful concept is his notion of the "bipolar symbol": that ritual symbols have both an "ideological pole," which represents important social values asserted in the ritual, and an "orectic pole," an aspect of the symbol that (often in a vivid way) calls up desires and emotions which may either reinforce the social values represented by the symbol, or be at odds with them, but which are in any case often unconscious. This concept is of great value in enabling us to understand the emotional import of a ritual, and the way it helps the celebrant deal with emotional issues stirred by a transition (cf. Ewing, 1992). It may be extended to thinking about the relationship between the explicit cultural value expressed in a myth and fantasies which may be unconsciously embedded in it (see Bettelheim, 1975); or indeed to any cultural product created by an individual or transmitted by individuals.

The way in which ritual may support emotional processes is especially evident in rituals of mourning. Several anthropologists have examined the ways in which ritual and cultural attitudes toward death support (or impede) the work of mourning (Bateson 1968; Levak, 1979; Reid, 1979). Beth Conklin discusses how the endocannibalistic funerary rites of the Wari Indians of Brazil work. She appropriately rejects the stereotyped "Freudian" explanations of some self-styled "psychoanalytic" folklorists of the old school such as: "Aggression. It's all about aggression. Every time you put something in your mouth, it's aggression" (Conklin, 2001, pp. 93–108). Then, after developing Wari ethnopsychology and their ideas about grief, ghosts, and the dangers of dwelling on memories, she gives her own interpretation

#### **Personal Symbols 61**

of how the mourning ritual helps the bereaved person to come to terms with the loss (pp. 228–239)—an interpretation which, despite her protests, is a very psychoanalytic one.

A concept which has been of great utility to the psychoanalytic understanding of ritual is Melford Spiro's (1961, 1965) concept of "culturally constituted defense mechanism:" Certain social forms, from a custom to an entire social institution, may provide ways for individuals to deal with particular emotional conflicts: they are, as it were, social forms which are especially adapted to serve as as personal defense mechanisms in the inner handling of those emotional issues. Spiro first introduced this concept in discussing Freud's (1914) suggestion that political institutions like the taboo on touching sacred chiefs, may be a way of simultaneously expressing and defending against the ambivalence all followers feel toward their leaders, or that mother-in-law avoidance may be a way of managing incestuous sexual desires in the family (Spiro, 1961). He developed the concept more fully in an article analyzing the psychological functions of Burmese monasticism (Spiro, 1965).

George Pollock (1972) drew on Melford Spiro's (1965) concept of a "culturally constituted defense" to demonstrate how orthodox Jewish mourning prescriptions segment mourning into periods that correspond to natural phases of mourning—crisis, grief, and coming to terms with loss. The directives mandate conduct in keeping with the shifting needs of the work of mourning that evolve through these periods. Emotional conflicts that are issues in mourning, such as the sense of guilt over ambivalence toward the lost person (one of the most frequent problems that disrupt mourning and lead to pathological grief), are articulated in the dominant symbols in the prayers and ritual injunctions. Thus, he suggests, mourning prescriptions help the bereaved person to deal with the needs of the work of mourning and to face the more difficult emotional issues that might otherwise lead to persisting emotional problems.

For Freud (1917/1957, pp. 244–245), the heart of mourning is the "work of remembering": the task of going through one's memories of life with the lost person and accepting that life will henceforth be without the person. Among the Sora of eastern India, Piers Vitebsky, an anthropologist trained in psychoanalysis, goes even more deeply into the sequence of states the deceased goes through, as the deceased person—or the memory of him or her—is gradually detached from the world of the living. The different stages of this process make their "memories" into successively different kinds of presences for their surviving relatives—at first a presence whose nature depends on the way in which the person died, then a more generalized kind of presence. Vitebsky views this sequence of stages of dying not just as a "psychology of death," but as a "total interpretation of death," invoking the continued but gradually attenuated participation of the recently dead in the community (Vitebsky, 1993, p. 17); and he draws a parallel between this and the work of mourning as described by Freud.

Spiro's "culturally constituted defense," or as he later generalized it "culturally constituted compromise formation," can be used to mediate between the cultural level and the individual psychic level. It may be used, for example, to describe the way in which Parintintin Indians of Brazil use food taboos—avoidance of certain foods by both parents during a woman's pregnancy, or when one's child is sick. Dreams which the Parintintin report show that their food avoidances represent ambivalent feelings toward the coming infant or toward a sick child, feelings which they cannot acknowledge openly to themselves; the food avoidances serve simultaneously as a way of expressing the ambivalence, and of expiating it (Kracke, 1990).

### **PERSONAL SYMBOLS**

In a study of Sri Lankan Sinhalese ascetic mystics, Gananath Obeyesekere has focused on one symbol of their ascetic condition: matted locks of hair, which are regarded as the *lingam* (phallus) of the god. In a series of in-depth interviews with several of these women, he discovers how they use this collective religious symbol to resolve personal, emotional problems in their lives (Obeyesekere, 1981). Such symbols—publicly recognized symbols which, however, retain a deep and unique personal significance—he terms "personal symbols." He develops an argument in his book, based on interviews with a number of these ascetic mystics, that such "personal symbols" may express problematic emotions, forbidden wishes, and guilt over them. The public symbols are appropriated by each individual as a kind of collectively provided personal symptom. In a subsequent book (Obeyesekere, 1990), he generalizes this line of thinking, in an analogy with the "dream work" (Freud, 1900/1955),

to "the work of culture": the transformation of personal fantasy into collective symbols.

Obeyesekere's term "personal symbol" has gained currency in psychoanalytic anthropology. Earlier Vincent Crapanzano had made some similar points about the female *jinn* figure, Aisha Qandisha, a Moroccan incubus demon who seduces men in their dreams and compels those who submit to her advances to marry her. A jealous bride, she permits no rivals in the waking lives of those men who have dreamed of her. While each man so trapped by her has his own dreams of her, his own personal conflicts expressed in the dream, she is nonetheless a shared cultural spirit. Crapanzano referred to such culturally provided vessels for personal fantasy as "symbolic–interpretive elements" in terms of which personal conflicts can be "symbolically articulated and resolved."

### **ANTHROPOLOGICAL CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE TREATMENT OF PSYCHOSIS**

The treatment of mental illness is a subject of considerable interest for psychoanalytic anthropology, in nonwestern societies and closer to home. Treatment programs of psychosis that integrate native healers into the treatment process have had striking results. A wellknown example is the program started by T. Adeoye Lambo at Naro in Nigeria, in which patients were taken into families in the village of Naro and, as part of the treatment, worked and participated in village and family life. Native healers were used alongside psychiatrists as part of the treatment (Lambo, 1964).

The psychoanalytic treatment of psychosis in North America was pioneered by two psychoanalysts who are also anthropologists. Bryce Boyer, who, together with his anthropologist wife Ruth, has lived among the Apache and done extensive field work with them (to the extent of being initiated as an Apache shaman: Boyer, 1964), was one of the first analysts in the United States to undertake psychoanalytic treatment of psycotic patients. His successful practice stimulated others, and led to the formation of the Boyer Institute in San Francisco. An extraordinarily successful treatment program for psychosis has been developed and run by Willy Apollon, a psychoanalyst from Haiti with anthropological training, with his colleagues, Danielle Bergeron and Lucie Cantin. Apollon, who did anthoropological study of Vaudou for his Sorbonne degree in philosophy (Apollon, 1998), together with Bergeron and Cantin, has constructed a psychoanalytically based program for the treatment of young adult psychotics in Quebec (Apollon, Bergeron, & Cantin, 2000). The program, run by GIFRIC ("The Interdisciplinary Freudian Group for Research and Clinical Intervention"), treats psychotic patients with a combination of milieu therapy (art programs, discussion groups), close personal contacts with staff, and individual psychoanalytic treatment based on Lacanian principles. Anthropologists participate in the program, interviewing patients, studying patterns in the patients' family backgrounds, and participating in the treatment process of each patient. The program has had impressive results, leading most of the patients eventually to the point where they have no further hospitalizations (most came into the program after repeated hospitalizations) and in many cases resume a productive life of work or study (Apollon, Bergeron, & Cantin, 1990, 2000). This program can be considered a successful integration of anthropological and psychoanalytic approaches in an effective treatment program (Apollon, 1999).

## **CULTURAL EXPRESSION OF NEUROSES AND PSYCHOSES**

Symptoms, as Freud emphasized, do not necessarily reveal the underlying pathological process. The important thing to understand is the underlying psychic structure: a phobia or an obsession may be the expression of a hysteric or obsessive neurotic structure, or they may be the symptoms of a psychosis. If the structures of a personality or an individual neurosis may be expressed in quite different ways, then it stands to reason that neurotic and psychotic processes would express themselves in different ways in different cultures.

The prevalence and forms of mental illness in different cultures is an old concern of psychoanalytic anthropology; culturally specific behavioral manifestations of schizophrenia have been discussed for Japan (Caudill, 1959), Italy (Parsons, 1969), and many other cultures. Parsons also raised the question of how people in a community differentiate mental illness from culturally appropriate accusations of witchcraft. Melford Spiro wrote on a case of psychosis in Ifaluk (Spiro, 1950), and later considered the cultural factors that contribute to mental illness in that culture (Spiro, 1959). One of

George Devereux's better known articles deals with the cultural aspects of mental illness, arguing that psychological dysfunction can be seen as a malfunction in the individual's relationship to his culture.

The "ethnic psychoses" have been another concern (Foulks, 1972). Thomas Hay (1971) analyzed Ojibwa windigo psychosis—possession by a cannibalistic "windigo" demon—as a culturally patterned manifestation of clinical depression. The analyst Daniel K. Freeman treated an Apache man with Ghost Sickness while a resident in psychiatry in a hospital near the Apache reservation (Freeman, Foulks, & Freeman, 1976), again seeing it as an expression of disordered mourning. Yoram Bilu (1985) analyzed 17–19thcentury *dybbuk* possession as a "culture-specific syndrome," and showed how the descriptions of *dybbuk* exorcism could be understood psychoanalytically. He discusses several cases of possession, comparing them with Freud's (1923/1961) analysis of a 17th-century "demonological neurosis" and arguing that they can be understood as cases of hysteria. More recently, Douglas Hollan (1994) has discussed a case of "magical poisoning" among the Toraja: a man who, after a confrontation with another man in a market over the exchange of some chickens, had "visions of chickens crawling all over his body" and other symptoms conventionally linked to magical attack. Hollan situates this event in his life history, accounting for the man's symptom as a response to his own anger. Other manifestations of anxiety (including anxiety after a death), and of neurotic symptoms, are discussed in his book of the same period (Hollan, 1994).

In Brazil, there is a lively interest in the social aspects of mental illness and its treatment, evidenced not only in publications (Cerqueira, 1982; Freire Costa, 1986, 1989, 1994) but also in the active meetings of the Brazilian Association of Ethnopsychiatry (ABE). A special cultural problem of mental health has been of considerable concern to psychoanalysts and anthropologists (Sebe Bom Meihy, 1991): the incidence of suicide in many Brazilian (and other American) indigenous cultures, nowhere higher than among the Kaiowá Guaraní. Darcy Ribeiro first called attention to the problem of suicide in Tupí groups in his moving story of an Urubú Indian man who, after the death of his son, goes on a long wandering journey culminating in his suicide by drowning himself in a river (Ribeiro, 1957/1980). More recently the problem of frequent suicide among Guaraní Indians has been discussed at anthropological conferences and

at meetings of the ABE. The psychoanalyst Sergio Levcovitz (1998) made a personal visit to the Kaiowá reservation to investigate the factors that lead to this situation. In a framework that combines Durkheim's concept of *anomie* and Lévi-Strauss's of structure (Lévi-Strauss, 1949/1963) with Freud, Levcovitz undertook a field study and an exploration of the comparative anthropological literature on other related (Tupí) groups, exploring the traditional identity of the Guaraní and the impact on it of the conditions to which they have been subjected in their reservation. This is an important study worthy of being more widely read, and (like several of the other works mentioned in this paragraph) should be translated.

## **ANTHROPOLOGICAL INTERVIEWING AND PSYCHOANALYTIC PROCESS: COMPARISON**

Anthropologists from early on have been aware of the importance of the relationship between the ethnographer and his or her principal "informants," and the relationships he or she forms in the culture studied. Malinowski wrote a great deal about his close relationship with the chief of Kiriwina and the garden magician Bagido'u; Joseph B. Casagrande (1950) even published a collection of articles written by anthropologists about their principal informants, or those with whom they had closest relationships in the culture. Roberto DaMatta, in an article in Portuguese on "The Vocation of the Ethnographer," distinguished the "chief informant"—the person who provides the ethnographer with the most information from the "cultural guide," those with whom one forms a personal relationship which helps one adapt to the culture (DaMatta, 1978). These relationships can be quite intense, as testified by many of the articles in Casagrande's book, both (as DaMatta suggested) on the part of the anthropologist and on the part of the people in the culture with whom the ethnographer forms relationships. Gilbert Herdt and Robert Stoller (1987, 1990) have written an article and a book comparing Stoller's psychoanalytic interviews with Herdt's anthropological ones. Katherine Ewing (1987) compares an anthropological interview with a psychoanalytic session using her own field interviews and treatment interviews as examples. Very roughly summarized: psychoanalysts put greater stock in withholding closure and "listening

between the lines," noting discrepancies between what is said and the tone in which it is said, supporting the emerging thought rather than the finished argument; they privilege listening for the hesitant expression of personal, individual thoughts and feelings rather than the confident expression of shared values. Anthropologists focus more attention on agreement or disagreement between different people being interviewed, eliciting the shared pattern of thought or the social emotion. Yet, perhaps emphasizing the compatibility of the two points of view, a number of psychoanalytic anthropologists have taken full psychoanalytic training and are now treating patients psychoanalytically—a trend led by Melford Spiro (2003) and Robert Paul. Anthropologists have also contributed to psychoanalytic thinking. Vincent Crapanzano has stressed the linguistic basis of the concept of transference, comparing it with the linguistic concept of "pragmatics" (Crapanzano, 1981, 1994).

Comparison between anthropological interviewing and psychoanlytic sessions can clarify the understanding of what goes on between an anthropologist and his "informant" or "native associate" (if we may use this term to avoid the wartime associations of the now popular term "collaborator"), and perhaps put the analytic interview in a new light as well. The relationship that an anthropologist develops with those he works with in the field become quite close, and may have a significant impact on the life of the associate. A well-known example is that of the Hopi "Sun Chief" Don Talayesva and the anthropologist who recorded his life history, Leo Simmons. Dorothy Eggan's (1949) article on Don Talayesva's dreams bring out on the one hand Don's idealization of his biographer, and on the other hand the extremely destructive effect on his life of Simmons's insistence that he break his culture's code of secrecy about ritual matters and disclose secret rituals in detail. This insistence was acknowledged in Simmons's own introduction to the book, apparently without recognition of its significance. Simmons published these disclosures in his book (Talayesva/Simmons, 1900), resulting in near ostracism of Don in his own village and intense guilt, which was revealed in the dreams he recounted to Eggan. While the main point of Eggan's article was a different one—Don's guilt over his attraction to a forbidden woman—his complex feelings about his relationship with Otto Simpson come out clearly in the article. Eggan's own work with him, on the other hand, was beneficial for him, helping him to resolve not only conflicts concerning a certain "Molly," but also to rework some of the conflicting feelings in his relationship with Simmons, and to resolve some conflicts that were active in him since childhood (see discussion of the article in Kracke, 1991, pp. 211–217).

The relationship with an anthropologist may be psychologically harmful or helpful to the informant (or cultural associate), even therapeutic for some (for example, Victor Turner's native assistant Muchona; Turner, 1959/1967a). I have noticed in my own field work that many of those I had interviews with made use of them to resolve personal issues; their interviews turned into brief periods of psychoanalytic therapy. One used the interviews to work through the mourning of two children who had just died (Kracke, 1980, 1981); another worked on a lifelong problem of insomnia, and gained some relief (Kracke, 1999); and a third abated his fear of illness when he recovered a childhood memory of the death of his father. Vincent Crapanzano discussed similar processes in his relationship with an old Moroccan man, Tuhami (Crapanzano, 1980). Michele Stephen takes these authors to task in her book on dreams (Stephen, 1995) for "being negotiated into the therapeutic role" (fn. 4, p. 337); but she herself, in an article on Mekeo (New Guinea) dreams, shows how empathically she was able to listen to her informant's dreams and thus offer her informant an opportunity to work through her anger and guilt feelings. I do not recommend that anthropologists undertake psychotherapy with their informants (which would only be advisable for those trainied in psychotherapy); but it is important for anthropologists to give much greater attention to the effect that their relationships with informants have on the emotional life of the informant, and be aware of issues such as the emotional process of disengagement as the time of departure nears (Kracke, 1999; see also the last paragraph of Turner, 1959/1967a).

The comparison of the anthropologist–informant relationship with psychotherapy can also be reversed. More than one ethnographer has compared the anthropologist's position with that of the patient in analysis (DaMatta, 1978). Jean Briggs discusses the intense relationship she formed with Inuttiaq, the Utku group leader who adopted her as a "daughter" in his family. The anthropologist is placed in a situation where she or he is dealing with unfamiliar stimuli and unexpected responses, a situation in which (like a child) he does not know what to expect, does not understand what is going on. This, like the psychoanalytic situation, promotes regression, and dependence and idealization of the persons who are willing to provide succor. Since in

#### **Psychoanalytic Movements in Third World Countries 65**

anthropology, as in psychoanalysis, the person of the ethnographer himself or herself is the instrument of observation (Bateson, 1968), it is important for us to understand the nature of our responses to the situation in which we find ourselves. The mental health of the anthropologist, as well as that of the native colleagues, is of concern, not only to medical anthropology, but also to the ethics of every anthropologist who works in the field with living people.

## **CULTURE SHOCK: A PHENOMENON FUNDAMENTAL TO ANTHROPOLOGY AND A HEALTH CONCERN**

The immersion in a culture different from one's own alternates periods of excitement and exhilaration with periods of great stress and exhaustion. This is true for anthropologists visiting another culture as much as for immigrants or visitors to a new culture. The various experiences involved in encountering a new culture, only partially encompassed by Kalervo Oberg's (1950) term "culture shock," are at the heart of the anthropological experience. They have been well described by novelists: E. M. Forster's *Passage to India*, Chinua Achebe's *Things Fall Apart*, and Laura Bohannan's *Return to Laughter*, to mention just a few. This process of adaptation to another culture is also of importance to medical anthropology: culture shock may be a major precipitant of emotional and psychological breakdown. Perhaps this is one reason why many of the people writing about culture shock have been psychotherapists and psychoanalysts (Antokoletz, 1987; Desai & Coelho, 1980; Garza-Guerrero, 1974; Ticho, 1971). The Japanese psychoanalyst Takeo Doi described his own culture shock on coming to the United States (Doi, 1973, chapter 1). But it has also, particularly recently, been an issue discussed by anthropologists with an interest in psychoanalysis (Bateson, 1968; Briggs, 1970, esp. chapter 6, Kracke, 1987, 2002). William Caudill (1961) has written of the process of adapting to another culture as one of "resocialization," going through childhood socialization again in the new culture. Garza-Guerrero (1974) stressed the mourning of one's own culture and the formation of a new identity in the new one, a model which Desai and Coelho (1980) apply to their therapeutic work with Indians having difficulty in adapting to the United States. I have argued (Kracke, 1987) that the experience of encountering a new culture can be likened to an analytic experience, with the ambiguity and uncertainty of the new environment and the relationships formed in it promoting regression and transferences to the new culture. The experience puts one at risk of emotional distress, but also offers the opportunity for deep personal change in adapting to the new culture.

## **PSYCHOANALYTIC MOVEMENTS IN THIRD WORLD COUNTRIES: BRAZIL, JAPAN, INDIA, CHINA AND RUSSIA**

The establishment of psychoanalytic movements in many non-European countries, especially in the Second and Third Worlds, offers an opportunity for psychoanalytic anthropology to study the adaptation of psychoanalysis itself to diverse cultures (Kutter, 1995). In Russia, psychoanalysis was centrally involved in the 1917 revolution, being regarded as a liberating intellectual movement; but was suppressed when Stalin took a dislike to it. Many of the well-known Russian psychologists, such as Alexander Luria and Lev Vygotsky, were analytically trained (Etkind, 1995). It has recently been undergoing a resurgence there. I have mentioned psychoanalysis in Brazil, which began early (Mezan, 1988); the first talk by a Brazilian psychiatrist on Freud's theory of neurosis was in 1899—though interest in Freud's theories of childhood sexuality was at first directed toward stricter controls on children's expression of sexuality. Real interest in psychoanalysis began among the group of artists who were active in the "Week of Modern Art" (*Semana de arte moderna*) in 1922, and by the psychiatrist Durval Marcondes; the history of Brazilian psychoanalysis has been ably researched by anthropologist Roberto Yutaka Sagawa (1985, 1994). Brazilian psychoanalysis, like Brazilian intellectual life in general, is deeply concerned with social justice. The accessibility of psychoanalysis for all, regardless of income, has been a constant ethical issue. An event from the time of the Brazilian dictatorship, when a psychoanalytic candidate was revealed to have been participating as a doctor in a government torture team, has continued to raise ethical concerns in Brazil, with worldwide repercussions (Vianna, 1994, 1997; Villareal, 1997; Villela 1998; see also Danneberg, 1995).

The psychoanalytic movements in India and Japan were established at an early date, in the 1920s and 1930s when Freud was still alive and able to engage with

them. The Indian psychiatrist Girindrashakhar Bose (1886–1953) read Freud's work and by 1914 undertook the use of Freud's methods, and his variants on them, in his own practice. In 1929 he corresponded with Freud about the difference between the underlying fantasies of his Indian patients and European ones: the fantasy of wishing to be a woman—what Karen Horney termed "womb envy"—was much more accessible to his Indian patients (Kakar, 1990). He did not just apply Freud's ideas to his Indian patients, but also "used Indian cultural categories to domesticate psychoanalysis for Indians" (Nandy, 1995, p. 123; Ramanujam, 1992). The Indian Journal of Psychoanalysis, *Samiksa*, has become a major organ for publication of articles by Indian psychoanalysts, including some interesting case histories (e.g., Kakar, 1979, 1980). Sudhir Kakar is India's best known psychoanalyst today. A student of engineering, Kakar befriended a lonely Erik Erikson while the latter was in India researching his book on Gandhi (Erikson, 1969). Then, with Erikson's influence, Kakar undertook psychoanalytic training in Berlin. He went on to author a number of books on psychoanalysis and Indian culture (Kakar, 1978, 1982, 1989). An article of special clinical importance is his "Psychoanalysis and Nonwestern Cultures" (Kakar, 1985), discussing the differences in experiences brought about by different conditions of child-rearing in India, and the modifications that must be made in psychoanalytic method to analyze Indian patients. Complaining of ethnocentric evaluations of Indian child development in American psychoanalytic articles—assertions of "overstimulation in the oedipal period" and the "pull toward oral fixation" because of "intense libidinal gratification"—he responds that from the Indian point of view a European or American child might just as well be seen as "sensually starved or understimulated" (p. 442). He calls for a "relativising" of psychoanalysis through exploration of the range of family conditions experienced by growing children in the different cultures of the world. On the other hand, he finds the kind of introspection presupposed in psychoanalytic treatment something characteristic of European thought, derived from Greek precedents, posing difficulties for psychoanalytic treatment with traditional Indian patients. B. K. Ramanujam (1986) offers a slightly different perspecive through clinical examples, presenting his successful analytic work with two traditional Indians.

Though interest in psychoanalysis began in Japan in the early part of the 20th century, 1912–1914, and a school influenced by Adolph Meyer flourished in the 1920s, psychoanalysis in Japan began in earnest when Heisaku Kosawa (1897–1968) went to Vienna for training in 1932. While there he had training analysis with Richard Sterba and supervision from Paul Federn, and visited Freud to present Freud with his paper on the "Ajase complex." Kosawa's analysis of the myth of Ajase, which epitomizes the intense ambivalence of the son toward the mother stemming from intense dependency feelings, was a first step toward a distinctively Japanese psychoanalytic theory (Okonogi, 1978–79). More recently, Takeo Doi (1973)—a Japanese psychoanalyst who did his psychiatric training in the United States—has developed a psychoanalytic theory in which the central part is played by the emotion designated in Japanese *amae*, referring to the dependent love an infant has for the mother—a form of love for which there is no term in English (but which is comparable to Balint's "primary object love," or Heinz Kohut's "self–object relationship"). What is especially distinctive about Doi's psychoanalytic theory, and what makes it of special interest to psychoanalytic anthropology, is that he has elaborated the theory entirely from Japanese ethnopsychological concepts. Doi's theory, translated into English, has provoked some interest in psychoanalytic circles around the world. It has also stirred controversy at home in Japan, where some other analysts and sociologists suggest that *amae* is regarded as more problematic in Japanese culture than Doi has portrayed it (Kumagai & Kumagai, 1986).

In China, the works of Freud were translated in the 1930s by a small group of analysts, but it is only recently that Chinese psychoanalysis has taken a major leap forward. Until recently, most mental patients in China have been treated by drugs, sometimes with antipsychotic medications used to treat patients with a neurosis much more appropriately treated by psychotherapy. An "International Symposium of Psychoanalysis" was held for the first time in 2001 and repeated in 2002, the first under the auspices of the Beijing University Medical Center and its director Hu Peicheng, and the second hosted by Professor Huo Datong in Chengdu. Translation and important contributions were provided by the Taiwan-based psychoanalyst Therese Bai. A major figure in Chinese psychoanalysis today is Huo Datong, who was analyzed in Paris and trained there in Lacanian psychoanalysis. Huo Datong has established a school of psychoanalysis at Sichuan University in Chengdu, Sichuan,

#### **References 67**

where a generation of psychoanalysts is now in training. Huo Datong's thesis in Paris was on the analysis of Chinese folklore. At the two conferences, he has been developing a theory of the unconscious expressed in Chinese characters, comparing the structure of dreams with the structure of meaning in characters. This work, which promises to establish a distinctly Chinese perspective on psychoanalysis, is being translated into English and French. Professor Hao's work, and the problem of reconciling psychoanalysis with the reticence before authority figures traditional in Chinese society—still true even with the cultural changes that have gone on in mainland China—these developments promise interesting cultural developments.

The introduction of psychoanalysis to a new country, particularly one of a nonwestern cultural heritage, offers an opportunity for psychoanalytic anthropology to examine the adaptation of psychoanalysis to new cultural conditions, and the new perspectives in psychoanalysis that may result from this adaptation. It may be seen as a continuation of the mutual relationship between psychoanalysis and anthropology envisioned by Sapir.

### **REFERENCES**

- Antokoletz, J. (1987). A psychoanalytic view of acculturation: Analyzing "I am Joaquin." *Texas Psychologist, 39*(2), 3–7.
- Apollon, W. (1996). Postcolonialism and psychoanalysis: The example of Haiti. *Journal for the Psychoanalysis of Culture and Society, 1*(1), 43–51.
- Apollon, W. (1998). L'espace vaudou et la métaphore phallique. *L'universel, perspectives psychanalytiques* (pp. 181–198). Québec, Canada: GIFRIC, Collection le savoir analytique.
- Apollon, W. (1999). *Psychoses: l'offre de l'analyste*. Québec, Canada: GIFRIC, Collection le savoir analytique.
- Apollon, W., Bergeron, D., & Cantin, L. (1990). *Traiter la psychose*. Québec, Canada:GIFRIC.
- Apollon, W., Bergeron, D., & Cantin, L. (2000). The treatment of psychosis. In K. Malone & S. Friedlander, (Eds.) *The subject of Lacan*. Albany: State University of New York.
- Bateson, M. C. (1968). 'Insight in a bicultural context. *Philippine Studies, 16*, 267–301.
- Bettelheim, B. (1975). *The uses of enchantment*. New York: Knopf.
- Bilu, Y. (1979). Sigmund Freud and Rabbi Yehudah: On a Jewish mystical tradition of 'psychoanalytic' dream interpretation. *Journal of Psychological Anthropology, 2*, 443–463.
- Bilu, Y. (1985). The Taming of the deviants and beyond: An analysis of Dybbuk possession and exorcism in Judaism. *The Psychoanalytic Study of Society, 11*, 1–32.

- Boyer, L. B. (1964). Folk psychiatry of the Apaches of the Mescalero Indian reservation. In A. Kiev (Ed). *Magic, Faith and Healing*. Glencoe, IL: The Free Press.
- Boyer, L. B. (1983). *The regressed patient*. New York: Jason Aronson.
- Boyer, L. B. & R. Boyer (1985). Crisis and continuity in the personality of an Apache shaman. *Psychoanalytic Study of Society 11*(63–104). Hillside, N. J.: The Analytic Press.
- Boyer, L., & Simon A. Grolnick (Eds.) The Analytic Press.
- Birman, J. (1988). *Percursos na história da psicanálise*. Rio de Janeiro, Brazil:Livraria Taurus Editora.
- Briggs, J. (1970). *Never in anger*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
- Casagrande, J. B. (Ed.). (1959). *In the company of man*. New York: Harper.
- Caudill, W. (1959). Observations on the cultural context of Japanese psychiatry. In M. K. Opler (Ed.), *Culture and mental health* (Chap. 8).
- Cerqueira, G. (Ed.). (1982). *Crise na psicanálise*. Rio de Janeiro, Brazil: Edições Graal.
- Conklin, B. (2001). *Consuming grief: Compassionate cannibalism in an Amazonian society*. Austin: University of Texas Press.
- Crapanzano, V. (1975). Saints, Jnun and dreams. *Psychiatry, 38*, 145–159.
- Crapanzano, V. (1980). *Tuhami: Portrait of a Moroccan*. Chicago IL: Univerisity of Chicago.
- Crapanzano, V. (1981). Text, transference and indexicality. *Ethos, 9*, 122–148. [Reprinted in *Hermes'dilemma and Hamlet's desire: On the epistemology of intepretation* (pp. 115–135). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.]
- Crapanzano, V. (1994). Rethinking psychological anthropology: A critical view. In M. Suárez-Orozco & George and Louise Spindler (Eds.), *The making of psychological antoropology* (pp. 223–243). New York: Harcourt Brace.
- DaMatta, R. (1978, Maio). O ofício de etnologo, ou como ter anthropological blues. *Boletim do Museu Nacional: Antropologia* (27).
- Danneberg, E. (1995). Psychoanalysis against the grain: Argentina, Chile, Nicaragua, Cuba. In Kutter, P. (1995). *Psychoanalysis International: Vol 2. America, Asia, Australia, further European Countries* (pp. 241–256). Stuttgart, Germany: Frommann-Holzborg.
- Desai, P., & Coelho, G. (1980). Indian immigrants in America: Some cultural aspects of psychological adaptation. In P. Saran & E. Eames (Eds.) *The new ethnics: Asian Indians in the United States*. New York: Praeger.
- Devereux, G. (1956). Normal and abnormal: The key problem of psychiatric anthropology. In J. B. C. & T. Gladwin (Eds.) *Some uses of anthropology: Theoretical and applied* (pp. 23–48). Washington, DC:Anthropological Society of Washington. [Reprinted in *Basic problems of ethno-psychiatry* Chapter 1, pp. 3–71, by G. Devereux (B. Gulati & G. Devereux, Trans.), 1980. Chicago IL:University of Chicago Press.]
- Doi, T. (1973). *The anatomy of dependence*. Tokyo, Japan: Kodansha International Press.
- Erikson, E. (1969). *Ghandi's truth*. New York: Norton.
- Erikson, E. (1975). In search of Gandhi. In *Life history and the historical moment* (pp. 111–189). New York: Norton.
- Etkind, A. (1995). Russia (until 1989). In Kutter, P. (1995). *Psychoanalysis International: Vol 2. America, Asia, Australia,*