# **Mental Disorders**

### **Alex Cohen**

## **BACKGROUND**

The *Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders*, 4th Edition (or *DSM-IV*) defines mental disorder as a "clinically significant … syndrome or pattern" in which an individual exhibits behavioral or psychological patterns that are associated with "distress, disability, or increased risk of pain or death" (American Psychiatric Association, 1994).

However, there are several problems with this definition. First, it covers a vast range of conditions. One might reasonably ask whether it is valid for a single definition to encompass the entire spectrum of conditions: from the relatively rare, severe and chronic psychoses to the relatively common, often comparatively mild and intermittent mood disorders. Even if it is valid to speak of mental disorders in such an inclusive way, more precise focusing may be obligatory when formulating and testing hypotheses about the effect of sociocultural environments on human mental well-being. For example, Vikram Patel's (1998) research in Zimbabwe focuses on the relationship of culture to the manifestation, course, and outcome of depression and anxiety, while Ezra Susser and his colleagues focus on brief psychotic disorders in India (Susser, Varma, Malhotra, Conover, & Amador, 1995; Susser & Wanderling, 1994).

Second, the authors of *DSM-IV* point out that the use of the term "mental" implies a clear differentiation between "mental" and "physical" disorder, a distinction that does not, in fact, exist. For example, tropical diseases such as malaria and sleeping sickness may produce symptoms that mimic those of the psychoses and depression (Weiss, Cohen, & Eisenberg, 2000), and non-specific fevers have been implicated in the etiology of acute brief psychosis in Northern India (Collins et al., 1999). At the same time, physical disorders such as myocardial infarction may be precipitated by emotional states of fear or anger (Kendell, 2001). Low-back pain often occurs in the absence of a distinct physical disorder (Kleinman, 1988). Finally, epidemiological research in 10 countries found that loss of energy, a symptom that is clearly associated with a host of physical disorders, was a core symptom among most people suffering from depression (Weissman et al., 1996).

Third, the diagnostic categories of the *DSM-IV* were derived from evidence gathered almost exclusively from North American and European populations. If the discipline of anthropology has demonstrated anything, it is that the diversity of human behavior extends far beyond what can be observed within one, albeit broad, cultural group. Applying those categories to people in non-Western societies may result in what Arthur Kleinman has termed a *category fallacy* which he defines as: "The reification of one culture's diagnostic categories and their projection onto patients in another culture, where those categories lack coherence and their validity has not been established" (Kleinman, 1988). Imagine a South Asian psychiatric epidemiologist conducting a study of semen loss syndrome (known as *sukra prameha* in Sri Lanka) in the United States where this syndrome is virtually unknown (Obeyesekere, 1985). For that matter, imagine investigations of *amok, latah, nervios*, or any of the other so-called culture-bound syndromes among European or North American populations. On the other hand, Kleinman (1988) suggests that the application of the *DSM-IV* concept of dysthymia, a chronic low-level form of depression, would be just as inappropriate in China. In all of these cases, the psychiatric categories validated in one cultural context would be found to be absent in other contexts, leaving one with the impression that cultural expressions of distress are incommensurable. This is difficult to believe. Yet, is it any more valid to claim that, for example, semen loss syndrome is nothing more than a variety of anxiety disorder; or that *amok* is a type of brief reactive psychosis (Kleinman, 1988)?

Fourth, the *DSM-IV* definition gives no indication of the multiplicity of causal factors (social, psychological, biological) that may alone or in combination lead to a mental disorder. Despite the claims of cognitive neuroscientists that mental disorders arise from dysfunctions in the neural mechanisms of the brain, aside from dementias such as Alzheimer's disease, no biological diagnostic markers have been identified for any mental disorder (Andreasen, 1997). At the same time, there is a large body of literature

#### **Universals and Culture-Specifics 487**

that demonstrates the influence of social, cultural, and economic environments—poverty, gender discrimination, political violence, malnutrition, and poor physical health on the etiology and epidemiology of all manner of mental disorders (Cohen, 1999; Desjarlais, Eisenberg, Good, & Kleinman, 1995; Dohrenwend & Dohrenwend, 1974; Kessler et al., 1994; Patel, 2000; Patel, Araya, de Lima, Ludermir, & Todd, 1999; WHO, 2001).

Fifth, the process of recognizing, that is, diagnosing, mental disorders represents a social and cultural negotiation. Although it appears that certain clusters of symptoms are universally considered as indicative of madness or insanity (Edgerton, 1966; Murphy, 1976), that is not the case in regard to the common mental disorders (Edgerton, 1969) or mild forms of mental retardation (Edgerton, 1984; Koegel & Edgerton, 1984). For these disorders, sociocultural norms, values, and beliefs, shape perceptions of what differentiates acceptable and normal personality traits from mental disorder.

Finally, the diagnostic system used in the *DSM-IV* is explicitly categorical, meaning that mental disorders are divided "into types based on criteria sets with defining features" (American Psychiatric Association, 1994). Although classification is a fundamental step in making sense of the natural world it is also true that the system used in the *DSM-IV* does not represent, "neatly bounded monothetic categories" (Littlewood & Dein, 2000). That is, diagnostic categories share many common symptoms and cannot be considered discrete entities. The lack of discreteness is also suggested by a high degree of co-morbidity—the cooccurrence of two or more mental disorders in an individual—that is revealed by epidemiological research (Kessler et al., 1994). This categorical model, which is based on evidence from North American and European populations, also presents a problem when looking at mental disorders cross-culturally. Distinct cultural patterns of symptomatology, referred to as "idioms of distress" (Nichter, 1981) by anthropologists, are either relegated to the exotica of socalled culture-bound syndromes, or dismissed as merely cultural variations of an underlying, universal form.

## **UNIVERSALS AND CULTURE-SPECIFICS**

The tension between looking for the underlying universal (and presumably biologically-based) structures of mental disorder and considering culture-specific "idioms of distress" has been at the center of cross-cultural psychiatry and anthropological investigations of mental disorders ever since Emil Kraepelin went to Java in 1904 and visited the asylum of Buitenzorg (Kraepelin, 2000/1904). There he undertook a study of *dementia praecox* (which later became known as schizophrenia) and manicdepressive insanity among the Javanese and European populations. Comparisons between the groups were difficult. While Kraeplin found that the clinical presentations of the disorders were "broadly in agreement," the symptomatology among the Javanese was, in general, "much less florid, less distinctively marked." In particular, Kraepelin noted the relative absence of delusions and auditory hallucinations, and offered the racist explanation that this was the result of a "lower stage of intellectual development" among the Javanese. In regard to the culture-bound syndromes, *amok* and *latah*, Kraepelin suggested that, rather than representing unique disorders, they were merely unusual forms of disorders already known.

The distinction between the universal and the particular was formalized by Kraepelin's student Karl Birnbaum into the *pathogenic/pathoplastic* dichotomy in which the former represented the underlying, presumably biological causes of mental disorders, and the latter represented the personal and cultural variations that always characterize the presentation of symptoms in individuals (Littlewood & Dein, 2000). To a great extent, this notion determined the nature of cross-cultural investigations of mental disorders for almost three quarters of a century.

The search for universal content was made difficult, however, by the lack of biological diagnostic markers and, therefore, relied on the presentation of symptoms. This worked well in relatively homogeneous European populations, but not so well in populations whose symptoms and clustering of symptoms were quite different (Littlewood & Dein, 2000). In 1977, Arthur Kleinman challenged this approach and offered a radically new vision for transcultural psychiatry and medical anthropology (Kleinman, 1977). He maintained that traditional comparative studies of mental disorders, depression in particular, imposed Western notions of psychiatric nosology and, therefore, obscured the role of culture. He went on to urge that cross-cultural studies begin with "detailed local phenomenological descriptions" of mental disorders rather than assuming the validity of Western psychiatric categories—an approach that he termed, "the new cross-cultural psychiatry."

Kleinman's perspective stimulated a host of anthropological investigations that looked at the meanings and cultural expressions of distress (Good, 1977; Nichter, 1981), explanatory models of illness (Kleinman, 1982; Weiss, 1997), cultural shaping of health-seeking behaviors (Lin, Tardiff, Donetz, & Goresky, 1978), the social course of mental illness (Kleinman, 1988), and clinical studies of course and outcome (Patel, 1998), among others. The result has been a much richer cross-cultural understanding of mental disorders (Littlewood & Dein, 2000; Skultans & Cox, 2000). In particular, this work made three important contributions to psychiatry (Becker & Kleinman, 2000). First, examining different mental disorders in a range of societies has produced "evidence for their syndromal significance and integrity in the absence of biological markers." Second, an understanding of the importance of explanatory models has led to clinical services that are more culturally appropriate. Finally, understanding the social roots of distress and the social course of mental disorders holds out the prospect of a public health approach that will improve outcomes and, perhaps, reduce the burden of disease associated with mental disorders (Murray & Lopez, 1996).

## **KINDS OF DISORDERS**

### **Depression**

The symptoms of depression include feelings of sadness, hopelessness, and thoughts of death, often accompanied by somatic complaints of fatigue, sleep disruptions, and weight loss, all of which result in functional and social disability. Worldwide, hundreds of millions of people suffer from depression. According to the most recent data, depressive disorder accounts for 4.4% of the world's total burden of disease as measured by Disability Life Years (DALYs), which makes it a public health problem whose magnitude is only slightly less than lower respiratory infections (6.4%), perinatal conditions (6.2), and HIV/AIDS (6.1) (WHO, 2001). Among people aged 15–44 years, depressive disorders account for fully 8.6% of global DALY, second only to HIV/AIDS (13.0%). Epidemiological surveys have found wide variation in cross-national rates, as well as rates among women that are consistently higher than those found in men (Weissman et al., 1996). Epidemiological research has also determined that, worldwide, about one quarter of all attendees in primary care settings are suffering from mental disorder, most frequently depression or mixed depression/anxiety, but that few of them are either diagnosed or treated (Ustun & Sartorius, 1995).

It was widely believed in much of the 20th century that African and Asian populations did not suffer from depression (Littlewood & Dein, 2000). Carothers (1953) maintained that Africans were not capable of experiencing depression, because their brains were less developed than those of Europeans. (Note the similarity to Kraepelin's racist explanation of cultural variation in the symptomatic presentation of *dementia praecox*.) These notions were eventually dispelled by research showing that the peoples of Sub-Saharan Africa suffered rates of depression that were as high, if not higher than those found among European populations (Abas & Broadhead, 1997; Orley & Wing, 1979). Even though rates in Asia have been found to be much lower than those found in Western populations (Kleinman, 1996; Lin, 1953; Weissman et al., 1996), depression is by no means absent entirely in Asia. More importantly, Kleinman's (1982, 1986) pioneering work on depression and neurasthenia in China suggests that the Western psychiatric conceptualization of depression positing feelings of sadness and loss as the core symptoms—represents but "a small fraction of the entire field of depressive phenomena" (Kleinman, 1977). Among many populations of the world, somatic complaints, rather than feelings of sadness and loss, are the symptoms most associated with depression (Kleinman & Cohen, 2000). Indeed, cross-cultural research has revealed that the somatic expression of symptoms in mental disorders is common in all societies, and that differences may reflect not only varying idioms of distress but also local health care systems that may neglect or discount mental disorders (Kirmayer & Young, 1998; Raguram, Weiss, Channabasavanna, & Devins, 1996).

Medical anthropologists have played a key role in delineating the cultural construction of depression (Kirmayer & Groleau, 2001; Kleinman, 1986; Kleinman & Good, 1985; Manson, 1995). For example, the anthropologist Spero Manson (1995) conducted research among American Indians suggesting that an understanding of depression must not only encompass symptoms but also take into consideration "the social contexts and cultural forces that shape one's everyday world, that give meaning to interpersonal relationships and life events." Although depression is the most frequently diagnosed problem among American Indians who come to mental health treatment facilities, it is easily misdiagnosed (Manson, Shore, & Bloom, 1985). One possible reason for misdiagnosis, at least among the Hopi Indians in the American Southwest, is that the Hopi language seems to lack a word or phrase for "depression." Moreover, about one quarter of the clinical sample that was suffering from depression reported a dysphoric mood for one rather than two weeks—two weeks is the duration criterion in the *DSM-IV*. Fully one half of the clinical sample, compared to one quarter in a sample from the general population, was suffering from both chronic and major depression. Finally, depression was secondary to alcoholism in every male subject, a pattern that is not so common in the general population of the United States. In sum, these findings indicate a critical need to recalibrate concepts of depression when looking at distress as manifested cross-culturally.

Arthur Kleinman (1986, 2000), and Sing Lee (1999), an anthropologically informed psychiatrist, have shown how the Western construction of depression overlaps with the Chinese construction of neurasthenia, and, at the same time, how the latter is distinctive and reflects the sociocultural context of China during the past 50 years. But the story does not end there. Neurasthenia is in the process of "disappearing" in China, transformed into depression by "a confluence of historical, political, and economic forces" (Lee, 2002) that include the entrance of China into the global market economy, the dominance of Western academic psychiatry, and the successful marketing of antidepressant medication by international pharmaceutical companies. This transformation has important implications for how the next generation of anthropologists and cross-cultural psychiatrists will define and study depression.

### **Schizophrenia**

Schizophrenia is a severe mental disorder that most frequently begins in late adolescence or early adulthood and is characterized by delusions (fixed, false ideas), hallucinations (either auditory or visual), and behavior that is deemed socially inappropriate (e.g., going without clothes, lack of attention to personal hygiene). It is the mental disorder most closely associated with the terms *madness* or *insanity* and is, in all societies, a highly stigmatized condition, one that may lead to social isolation, neglect, and abuse (Weiss et al., 2000). Schizophrenia is relatively rare; depending on the diagnostic criteria used, it has an incidence rate of fewer than 5 persons per 10,000. But if the disorder is chronically disabling, its prevalence is much higher, about 1–20 per 1,000 (Kulhara & Chakrabarti, 2001). Because of its severity and chronicity, schizophrenia is a leading cause of DALY among persons 15–44 years, accounting for 2.6% of their burden of disease (WHO, 2001).

Cross-cultural research on schizophrenia has a curious history. Kraepelin's explanation for cultural variation in the presentation of *dementia praecox* strikes us today as embarrassingly racist. About 25 years later, mirroring Margaret Mead's (2001) culturally relativistic claim that adolescence in Samoa looked nothing like it did in the West, Charles Seligman, a physician and anthropologist, claimed that nothing resembling schizophrenia had existed in New Guinea prior to European contact: "There is no evidence of the occurrence of mental derangement, other than brief outbursts of maniacal excitement, among natives who have not been associated with White Civilization," and went on to claim that financial debt to Europeans was the sole cause of "fatal instances of insanity" (Seligman, 2000/1929). However, we now question these claims because Seligman did not look beyond the evidence he found in a hospital, an institution whose patients and disorders were surely not representative of the indigenous population in general (Littlewood & Dein, 2000).

Later, some anthropologists thought that shamans were actually individuals with schizophrenia, but that the cultures in which they lived provided them with socially acceptable roles that minimized the functional consequences of the disorder (Devereux, 1980/1965; Kroeber, 1940). Jane Murphy (Murphy, 1976), for one, disputed this claim. She presented evidence that, at least in the case of the Yupik-speaking Eskimo, the behaviors of shamans were different from the behaviors of people defined as being *nuthkavihak* (insane). For the most part, the "shaman/schizophrenic" hypothesis has been abandoned (Good, 1994).

H. B. M. Murphy and A. C. Raman (Murphy & Raman, 1971) were the first to carry out a systematic comparison of the course of schizophrenia in two distinctly different sociocultural contexts. Through a retrospective comparison of hospital records, they concluded that schizophrenia showed less chronicity among persons in Mauritius than among a matched sample in the United Kingdom. However, the study suffered from at least one serious shortcoming: its reliance on hospital data as an accurate reflection of course of illness. The frequency with which people are hospitalized depends on a great number of sociocultural and socioeconomic factors. Individuals with similar levels of schizophrenic symptom severity will be hospitalized more frequently if they live in societies in which psychiatric resources are readily accessible than in societies without psychiatric facilities. Thus, impressions of course of illness that are derived from hospital data in different societies may only reflect differential access to psychiatric resources and not accurately present actual sociocultural differences in the chronicity of schizophrenia.

At about the same time of the research in Mauritius, the anthropologist Nancy Waxler conducted research on the course of schizophrenia among a group of Sinhalese Buddhists in Sri Lanka (Waxler, 1979). Again, course of illness in this so-called traditional society was found to be better than what was found in the developed societies of the West. Waxler interpreted these findings as evidence supporting social labeling theory, which postulates that cultural beliefs and reactions to schizophrenia either encourage or discourage chronicity. In particular, she maintained that cultural beliefs in external causes and a short course of schizophrenia protected individuals from developing long-term chronicity and disability. However, like Murphy and Raman, Waxler relied on hospital samples and long-term, retrospective follow-up. Furthermore, her conclusions were not based on either close, ethnographic examinations of the lives of people with schizophrenia or even survey data. Therefore, her conclusions more closely resemble conjecture than hypothesis testing (Cohen, 1992).

In much the same spirit of trying to demonstrate that "traditional" cultures are nurturing and "modern," but Western cultures are pernicious, Nancy Scheper-Hughes (1979) carried out ethnographic research in an attempt to explain high rates of schizophrenia in Western Ireland. Although her work is a fascinating account of life in a small rural community, and she makes a compelling argument that the nature of that sociocultural environment is a cause of the high prevalence rates of schizophrenia, the premise that Western Ireland has a high prevalence of schizophrenia was based on hospital rate statistics that were later shown to be artificially inflated (Cabot, 1990; Ni Nuallain, O'Hare, & Walsh, 1990). That is, Scheper-Hughes may have provided an explanation for a phenomenon that did not exist.

The most compelling evidence of the better prognosis for schizophrenia in non-industrialized societies comes from two cross-national studies conducted by the World Health Organization: the International Pilot Study of Schizophrenia (IPSS) (WHO, 1979), and the Determinants of Outcome of Severe Mental Disorder (DOSMeD) (Jablensky et al., 1992). The efforts of the DOSMeD project, in particular, represent the most ambitious and methodologically sophisticated cross-cultural study of schizophrenia. The investigators attempted to identify over a period of two years—all persons suffering from the first onset of schizophrenia in 13 catchment areas located in 10 countries. In brief, the research demonstrated that schizophrenia occurred throughout the world, that its clinical characteristics were more notable for cross-cultural similarities than differences, that the majority of persons with schizophrenia followed a remitting pattern of course over a period of two years, and that the incidence of narrowly defined schizophrenia was essentially constant throughout the world. Perhaps the most important finding was that the research demonstrated "in a clear and, possibly, conclusive way … that the course and outcome of schizophrenia was markedly better in the centers located in developing countries. (Jablensky et al., 1992). In particular, differences in the prognosis of schizophrenia may reflect differences in family support, styles of interaction, industrialization, and urbanization.

In general, anthropologists have embraced the findings of the DOSMeD research. It has been cited as the "single most important … finding" in cross-cultural psychiatry (Lin & Kleinman, 1988), despite a host of methodological problems including: (1) the absence of ethnographic and sociocultural evidence to support the conclusions (Cohen, 1992; Edgerton & Cohen, 1994); (2) an overwhelming emphasis on universal aspects of schizophrenia rather than cross-national variation in the incidence of broadly defined schizophrenia and cultural differences in the clustering of symptoms (Kleinman, 1988); (3) the use of outcome variables—such as percentage of the follow-up period spent in the hospital or on psychotropic medication—that reflect differences in socioeconomic environments rather than variations in course of illness; (4) extensive evidence of the neglect, abuse, and severe stigmatization of persons with schizophrenia in several of the developing societies in which the DOSMeD research was conducted (National Human Rights Commission, 1999; Odejide & Olatawura, 1979); and (5) indications that, in the West, the long-term course of schizophrenia displays much less chronicity than once thought (Harding, Zubin, & Strauss, 1987, 1992). Even with the questions about the validity of the "developing" and "developed" categories, and the need for "further

#### **References 491**

study within the 'black box' of imputed cultural effects on outcome" (Craig, Siegel, Hopper, Lin, & Sartorius, 1997), the DOSMeD research, and its predecessor, the International Study of Schizophrenia (Harrison et al., 2001; Hopper & Wanderling, 2000), continue to be cited as conclusive evidence of better outcomes for schizophrenia in the developing world (Kulhara & Chakrabarti, 2001).

## **THE FUTURE**

For most of the 20th century, the anthropological study of mental disorders and related phenomena focused on exotic healing rituals, the so-called culture-bound syndromes, and the search for universal features that were hidden by the "noise" of culturally shaped symptomatology (Becker & Kleinman, 2000). With Arthur Kleinman's (1977) call for a "new cross-cultural psychiatry," the focus shifted away from universals to the examination of local "idioms of distress" and how the nature of human suffering was shaped into a multitude of forms by cultural processes. At the beginning of the 21st century, the focus of cross-cultural psychiatry and psychiatric anthropology is once again shifting. In a psychiatric textbook article on anthropology and psychiatry, Anne Becker (a psychiatrist and anthropologist) and Kleinman state that the crosscultural study of mental disorders "provides evidence for their syndromal significance and integrity in the absence of biological markers" (Becker & Kleinman, 2000). Is this an anthropological version of the old comparative psychiatry, a neo-Kraepelinism? Sing Lee (2002) challenges the field, stating that cultural psychiatry must move away from "debates over categories and repetitious studies of reliability" that may have become irrelevant in an era of global change. Research is now questioning the assumption that depression is distinguished in some societies by psychological symptoms and in others by somatic symptoms (see also Kirmayer & Young, 1998). Whether or not depression has distinct forms in different cultural settings, and whether or not idioms of distress are incommensurable, the apparent effectiveness of antidepressants to treat a wide range of disorders challenges some of the foundations of the "new cross-cultural psychiatry." That is, the dominance of Western psychiatry and its biomedical model of mental disorders, along with the international marketing of antidepressants to treat a broad spectrum of disorders, has marginalized the notion or utility of the cultural construction of mental illness. Therefore, Sing Lee suggests that the central role for anthropologists and cross-cultural psychiatrists is to become engaged in addressing the barriers to effective care that now characterize international mental health. These barriers include stigma and discrimination against persons with mental illness, lack of resources devoted to the treatment of mental disorders, little critical assessment of mental health and services policies, and virtually no evaluation of mental health programs in low-income countries (Cohen, 2001).

## **REFERENCES**

- Abas, M. A., & Broadhead, J. C. (1997). Depression and anxiety among women in an urban setting in Zimbabwe. *Psychological Medicine, 27*, 59–71.
- American Psychiatric Association. (1994). *Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders* (4th ed.). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association.
- Andreasen, N. C. (1997). Linking mind and brain in the study of mental illnesses: A project for a scientific psychopathology. *Science, 275*(5306), 1586–1593.
- Becker, A. E., & Kleinman, A. (2000). Anthropology and psychiatry. In B. J. Sadock & V. A. Sadock (Eds.), *Comprehensive textbook of psychiatry* (Vol. 1, 7th ed., pp. 463–476). Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
- Cabot, M. R. (1990). The incidence and prevalence of schizophrenia in the Republic of Ireland. *Social Psychiatry & Psychiatric Epidemiology, 25*, 210–215.
- Carothers, J. C. (1953). *The African mind in health and disease: A study in ethnopsychiatry*. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization.
- Cohen, A. (1992). Prognosis for schizophrenia in the Third World: A reevaluation of cross-cultural research. *Culture, Medicine & Psychiatry, 16*, 53–75, 101–106.
- Cohen, A. (1999). *The mental health of indigenous people: An international overview*. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization.
- Cohen, A. (2001). The effectiveness of mental health services in primary care: The view from the developing world. Geneva: World Health Organizations.
- Collins, P. Y., Varma, V. K., Wig, N. N., Mojtabai, R., Day, R., & Susser, E. (1999). Fever and acute brief psychosis in urban and rural settings in north India. *British Journal of Psychiatry, 174*, 520–524.
- Craig, T. J., Siegel, C., Hopper, K., Lin, S., & Sartorius, N. (1997). Outcome in schizophrenia and related disorders compared between developing and developed countries: A recursive partitioning re-analysis of the WHO DOSMD data. *British Journal of Psychiatry, 170*, 229–233.
- Desjarlais, R., Eisenberg, L., Good, B., & Kleinman, A. (1995). *World mental health: Problems and priorities in low-income countries*. New York: Oxford University Press.