#### **Introduction 109**

- Rothman, B. K. (1989). *Recreating motherhood: Ideology and technology in patriarchal society*. New York: Norton.
- Rubinstein, R. A., Laughlin, C. D. Jr., & McManus, J. (1984). *Science as cognitive process: Toward an empirical philosophy of science*. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
- Scheper-Hughes, N., & Lock, M. (1987). The mindful body: A prologomenon to future work in medical anthropology. *Medical Anthropology Quarterly, 1*(1), 6–41.
- Schiebinger, L. (1993). *Nature's body*. Boston: Beacon Press.
- Simons, R. C., & Hughes, C. (Eds.). (1985). *The culture-bound syndromes: Folk illnesses of psychiatric and anthropological interest*. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Reidel.
- Singer, M., Valentín, F., Baer, H., & Jia, Z. (1998). Why does Juan García have a drinking problem? The perspective of critical medical anthropology. In P. J. Brown (Ed.), *Understanding and applying medical anthropology* (pp. 286–302). London: Mayfield.
- Stein, H. (1967). The doctor–nurse game. *Archives of General Psychiatry, 16*, 699–703. (Reprinted in *Conformity and conflict*, 4th ed., pp. 167–176, by J. P. Spradley & D. W. McCurdy (Eds.), 1980.) Boston, MA: Little, Brown.
- Stein, H. (1990). *American medicine as culture*. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
- Strauss, A., Schatzman, L., Bucher, R., Ehrlich, D., & Sabzhin, M. (1964). *Psychiatric ideologies and institutions*. New York: Free Press.

- Tresolini, C. P., & The Pew–Fetzer Task Force on Advancing Psychosocial Health Education (1994). *Health professions education and relationship-centered care*. San Francisco, CA: Pew Health Professions Commission.
- Unschuld, P. U. (1985). *Medicine in China: A history of ideas*. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Van Der Geest, S., & Reynolds Whyte, S. (Eds.). (1988). *The context of medicines in developing countries: Studies in pharmaceutical anthropology*. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic.
- Vogt, E. Z. (1976). *Tortillas for the Gods*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
- Weisberg, D., & Long, S. O. (Eds.). (1984). Biomedicine in Asia: Transformations and variations [Special issue]. *Culture, Medicine and Psychiatry, 8*(2).
- Wright, P., & Treacher, A. (Eds.). (1982). *The problem of medical knowledge: Examining the social construction of medicine*. Edinburgh, UK: University of Edinburgh Press.
- Young, A. (1995). *The harmony of illusions: Inventing post-traumatic stress disorder*. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
- Zimmerman, F. (1987). *The jungle and the aroma of meats*. Berkeley: University of California Press.

# **Medical Pluralism**

#### **Hans A. Baer**

## **INTRODUCTION**

Medical systems in all human societies, regardless of whether they are indigenous or state-based, consist of a dyadic core consisting of a healer and a patient. Healers range from generalists, such as the shaman in indigenous societies or the proverbial family physician in modern societies, to specialists, such as the herbalist, bonesetter, midwife, or medium in preindustrial societies or the urologist, internist, or psychiatrist in modern societies. In contrast to indigenous societies, which tend to exhibit a more-or-less coherent medical system, state or complex societies exhibit the conflation of an array of medical systems—a phenomenon generally referred to by medical anthropologists, as well as medical sociologists and medical geographers, as medical pluralism. The medical system of a society consists of the totality of medical subsystems that coexist in a cooperative or competitive relationship with one another. Although much of the initial work that anthropologists conducted on medical pluralism occurred in African and Asian societies, Leslie (1976, p. 9) notes that "[e]ven in the United States, the medical system is composed of physicians, dentists, druggists, clinical psychologists, chiropractors, social workers, health food experts, masseurs, yoga teachers, spirit teachers, Chinese herbalists, and so on."

Medical pluralism is not a recent phenomenon but has its roots in increasing patterns of ranking and social stratification in human societies. Fabrega (1997) argues that, as opposed to foraging and village-level societies, chiefdoms and early state societies exhibit the beginnings of the "institution" or "system" of medicine which includes: (1) an elaborate corpus of medical knowledge which continues to embrace aspects of cosmology, religion, and morality; and (2) the beginnings of medical pluralism, manifested by the presence of a wide variety of healers, including general practitioners, priests, diviners, herbalists, bonesetters, and midwives who undergo systematic training or apprenticeships. He delineates two broad levels in the plural medical systems of early civilizations and empires: (1) an official, scholarly academic system oriented to the care of the elite; and (2) a wide array of less prestigious physicians and folk healers who treat subordinate segments of the society, such as craftspeople, artisans, soldiers, peasants, and slaves. The state plays an increasing role in medical care by hiring practitioners for the elites and providing free or nominal care for the poor, especially during famines and epidemics. The literate or "great" medical tradition includes the formation of a medical profession, the beginnings of clinical medicine, and the increasing commercialization of the healing endeavor.

With European expansion and colonialism, allopathic medicine, or what eventually evolved into biomedicine, came to supercede in prestige and influence even professionalized traditional medical systems. Third World societies are characterized by a broad spectrum of humoral and ritual curing systems. Some of these are associated with literate traditions, such as Hinduism, Islam, Confucianism, Buddhism, and Taoism, and have schools, professional associations, and hospitals. Even though the upper and middle classes resort to traditional medicine as a backup for the shortcomings of biomedicine and for divination, advice, and luck, it constitutes the principal form of health care for the masses. As Frankenberg (1980, p. 198) observes, "The societies in which medical pluralism flourishes are invariably class divided."

## **CONCEPTIONS OF MEDICAL PLURALISM**

Various medical anthropologists have formulated various schemes or approaches that recognize the phenomenon of medical pluralism in complex societies. Based upon their cultural ecological settings, Dunn (1976) delineates three types of medical systems: (1) local medical systems, (2) regional medical systems, and (3) the cosmopolitan medical system. Local medical systems are folk or indigenous medical systems in foraging, horticultural or pastoral societies, or peasant communities in state societies. Regional medical systems are systems distributed over a relatively large area, such as Ayurveda and Unani medicine in India and Sri Lanka and traditional Chinese medicine. Cosmopolitan medicine refers to the world-wide system commonly referred to as Western medicine, regular medicine, allopathic medicine, scientific medicine, or biomedicine. Complex societies generally contain all three of these systems. In modern industrial or post-industrial societies, biomedicine the dominant system—tends to exist in a competitive relationship with other systems such as chiropractic, naturopathy, Christian Science, evangelical faith healing, and various folk medical systems. It often seeks either to annihilate these systems or to restrict their scope of practice. In some instance, biomedicine seeks to absorb or co-opt them, particularly if the latter achieve increasing legitimacy.

Chrisman and Kleinman (1983) created a widely used model that delineates three overlapping sectors in health care systems. The popular sector consists of health care performed by patients themselves, their families, social networks, and communities. It includes a wide array of therapies, such as special diets, herbs, exercise, rest, baths, and massage, and, in the case of modern societies, articles such as over-the-counter drugs, vitamin supplements, humidifiers, and hot water bottles. Based on research in Taiwan, Kleinman estimates that 70–90% of the treatment episodes on the island occur in the popular sector. The folk sector encompasses various healers who function informally and often on a quasi-legal or even illegal basis. These include shamans, mediums, magicians, herbalists, bonesetters, and midwives. The professional subsector includes the practitioners and bureaucratic structures, such as clinics, hospitals, and associations, which are associated with both biomedicine and professionalized heterodox medical systems, such as Ayurvedic and Unani medicine in South Asia, herbalism and acupuncture in the People's Republic of China, and homeopathy, osteopathy, chiropractic, and naturopathy in Britain.

In keeping with Navarro's (1986, p. 1) assertion that classes as well as races, ethnic groups, and genders within capitalist societies "have different ideologies which appear in different forms of cultures," it may be argued that these social categories also construct different medical systems to coincide with their respective views of reality. In contrast to many medical anthropologists who observe that complex societies exhibit a pattern of medical pluralism, many neo-Marxian medical social

#### **Case Studies of Medical Pluralism 111**

scientists confine their attention to the dominant capitalintensive system of medicine and ignore or at best give fleeting attention to alternative medical systems. Critical medical anthropology (CMA), which builds on the work of the political economy of health, attempts to overcome these shortcomings (Singer & Baer, 1995). It asserts that patterns of medical pluralism tend to reflect hierarchical relations in the larger society. Patterns of hierarchy may be based upon class, caste, racial, ethnic, regional, religious, and gender distinctions. Medical pluralism flourishes in all socially stratified or state societies and tends to mirror the wide sphere of class and social relationships. National medical systems in the modern world tend to be "plural," rather than "pluralistic," in that biomedicine enjoys a dominant status over heterodox and/or folk medical practices. In reality, plural medical systems may be described as "dominative" in that one medical system generally enjoys a preeminent status vis-à-vis other medical systems. While within the context of a dominative medical system one system attempts to exert, with the support of social elites, dominance over other medical systems, people are quite capable of "dual use" of distinct medical systems (Romanucci-Ross, 1977).

Medical pluralism in the modern world is characterized by a pattern in which biomedicine exerts dominance over alternative medical systems, whether they are professionalized or not. The dominant status of biomedicine is legitimized by laws that grant it a monopoly over certain medical practices, and limit or prohibit the practice of other types of healers. Nevertheless, biomedicine's dominance over rival medical systems has never been absolute. The state, which primarily serves the interests of the corporate class, must periodically make concessions to subordinate social groups in the interests of maintaining social order and the capitalist mode of production. As a result, certain heterodox practitioners, with the backing of clients and particularly influential patrons, have been able to obtain legitimation in the form of full practice rights (e.g., homeopathic physicians in Britain, osteopathic physicians in the United States, and Ayurvedic and Unani physicians in India) or limited practice rights (e.g., chiropractors, naturopaths, and chiropractors in North American societies, many European societies, as well as Australia and New Zealand). Lower social classes, racial and ethnic minorities, and women have utilized alternative medicine as a forum for challenging not only biomedical dominance but also, to a degree, the hegemony of the corporate class and its political allies.

## **CASE STUDIES OF MEDICAL PLURALISM**

### **India**

Leslie (1977) has conducted historical and ethnographic research on medical pluralism in India. He delineates five levels in the Indian dominative medical system: (1) biomedicine, which relies upon physicians with M.D. and Ph.D. degrees from prestigious institutions; (2) "indigenous" medical systems, which include practitioners who have obtained degrees from Ayurvedic, Unani, and Siddha medical colleges; (3) homeopathy, whose physicians have completed correspondence courses; (4) religious scholars or learned priests with unusual healing abilities; and (5) local folk healers, bonesetters, and midwives. In contrast to some 150,000 biomedical physicians, there were an estimated 400,000 practitioners of Ayurveda, Unani, and Siddha in the early 1970s. Ayurveda is based upon Sanskrit texts, Unani on Galenic and Islamic medicine, and Siddha on South Indian humoralism. In addition to 95 biomedical schools, India has 92 Ayurvedic colleges, 15 Yunani colleges, and a college of Siddha medicine. Although homeopathy entered India as a European import, the opposition to it by the British-dominated biomedical profession spared it association with colonialism. Homeopathic practices have become a standard component of Ayurveda. Although the Indian state continued to support biomedicine after independence, in 1970 it established the Central Council of Indian Medicine as a branch of the Ministry of Health in an effort to legitimize the traditional professionalized medical systems and for the purposes of registering traditional physicians, regulating education and practice, and fostering research (Leslie, 1974). According to Leslie (1992, p. 205), "[Traditional] physicians … are sometimes painfully aware that cosmopolitan medicine [or biomedicine] dominates the Indian medical system, yet a substantial market exists for commercial Ayurvedic products and for consultation with practitioners."

### **Zaire**

Janzen (1978) presents an account of how patients in a region of Lower Zaire engage in "therapy management" and how they resort to various medical systems in addressing illness. The "therapy management group," consisting of kinspeople, friends, and colleagues, serves to broker the relationship between physicians, nurses, indigenous and religious healers, on the one hand, and the patient, on the other hand. The plural medical system in Lower Zaire consists of the following levels: (1) biomedical physicians and nurses (most of whom initially were European expatriates but in time were Africans); (2) various *banganga* or indigenous healers; (3) kinship therapy; and (4) *bangunza* or diviners and prophets. Whereas some indigenous healers, such as the *naganga mbuki* or the herbalist, treat natural illnesses, others, such as the *nganga nkisi* or magician treat illness emanating from supernatural causes or emotional states, such as anger. The clan meeting serves as the focus of kinship therapy in which several diagnostic sessions are followed by therapeutic sessions. African Christian missionary leaders, referred to as *bangunza*, engage in layingon-of-hands and other religious healing techniques. Although the people of Lower Zaire recognize the advantages of biomedicine, they continue to subscribe to traditional views of health, illness, and curing.

### **The Bolivian Altiplano**

Crandon-Malamud (1991) conducted fieldwork between 1976 and 1978 on medical pluralism in Kachitu (pseudonym), a rural town on the Bolivian *altiplano*. Kachitu is the center for a canton consisting of some 16,000 Aymara Indians over 36 *communidades*. The town proper has a population of about 1,000 people consisting of three ethnoreligious groups: (1) Aymara peasants, (2) the Methodist Aymara, and (3) Catholic *mestizos*. Prior to the Revolution of 1952, the mestizos, which constitute about one third of the population of Kachitu, supervised the Aymara for national elites who generally resided in La Paz and other cities. Since the Revolution, the mestizos have been seeking to avoid poverty in a shrinking population and are a socially fragmented ethnic category that includes teachers, small shopkeepers, and poor occasional agricultural laborers. Prior to 1952, the Aymara, which make up another third of the village, lived in Indian communities that were heavily taxed or on haciendas. Some Aymara were miners and performed personal services. Many Aymara peasants migrated to Kachitu from the haciendas upon acquiring land through fictive ties with mestizos. Following the Revolution and land reform, others moved to town and claimed land on the outskirts that had been confiscated from the mestizos. The Methodist Aymara are converts or descendants of converts to the Methodist church which established a mission in the early 1930s. The Methodist Aymara attended mission schools and became entrepreneurs who took over local administrative and political offices when the revolutionary government threw the mestizos out of these positions. They function as the economic and political backbone of Kachitu. Crandon-Malamud (1991, p. x) tends to conflate ethnicity and social class, noting that Aymara-ness, mesitzo-ness, and even Methodism constitute "masks for social class."

She situates four themes that permeate the dialogue about medical etiology and diagnosis in Kachitu pervasive hunger, subordination, victimization, and exploitation—within the context of the Bolivian political economy. The first one—that of race—differentiates the purportedly white elites from mestizos and Indians as a means to justify unequal access to the political process; the second one entails an economic system that exploits Indian labor; the third one consists of *caudillo* political structures that suppress dissent on the part of rural mestizos and Indians; and the fourth one is conflict that exists between mestizos and Indians.

Crandon-Malamud delineates five domains of medical resources utilized by Kachitu depending upon the diagnosis: Aymara home care, shamanistic or *yatiri* care, mestizo folk home care, biomedical clinical care, and hospital care in La Paz. She examines the intricate ways that residents of Kachitu utilize the local plural medical system for purposes of establishing their sense of cultural identity and obtaining the few resources available to them. Contrary to the wishes of biomedical practitioners and indigenous healers, decisions concerning illness etiology and diagnosis tend to be made primarily by patients themselves, their families, and other interested parties. Biomedical physicians who practice in Kachitu must abandon many of their preconceptions and adapt themselves to the local belief systems if they expect to establish rapport with their patients. The medical ideologies in Kachitu function as options that address different types of ailments. As Crandon-Malamud (1991, pp. 202–203) observes, "All things being equal, if one has tuberculosis, one goes to the physician in the Methodist clinic; if one suffers from khan achachi, one goes to the yatiri; if one has a stomach upset, one resorts to *medicinas caseras*." [Note: *khan achachi* refers to a sickness stemming from a phantom, *khan achachi*, who consumes meat, alcohol, and other gifts that it demands from people; *medicinas caseras* means home care.]

Kachitunos, regardless of their social standing, tend to be pragmatists when it comes to seeking medical

#### **Case Studies of Medical Pluralism 113**

treatment. Medical dialogue serves as an idiom by which a person identifies his or her ethnic identity within the larger context of Bolivian society—one that is characterized by frequent economic crises, unstable governments, and military coups. Mestizos in Kachitu who find themselves downwardly mobile may in essence gain access to greater health care by turning to Indian indigenous medicine. Crandon-Malamud argues that they employ medical dialogue as a mechanism of empowerment in the face of external hegemonic forces. Unfortunately, this medical dialogue has served as a rather limited form of empowerment and in reality more as a coping mechanism within the larger Bolivian political economy.

### **Haiti**

Like Crandon-Malamud, Brodwin (1996) conducted ethnographic research on medical pluralism at the village level, namely in the Haitian village of Jeanty (pseudonym). In addition to access to biomedicine or "metropolitan medicine," the villagers turn to various other practitioners and healing systems in their search for better health. These include herbalists, bonesetters, midwives, the cult of Roman Catholic saints, Voodou priests, and Pentecostal ministers. Morality and medicine are intricately intertwined in rural Haiti and pose questions of innocence or guilt. People in Jeanty debate among themselves as to which healing system they should resort to in an effort to achieve moral balance in their lives. While recognizing its value in treating certain diseases, they regard the biomedical dispensary in their village "as yet another site where local representatives of powerful outside forces provide valued resources and techniques for ordering life" (Brodwin, 1996, p. 67). For the problems of everyday life, the villagers can turn to the *houngan* and *mambo* (male and female Vodou religious healer), Catholic lay exorcists, or Pentecostal healers. Whereas Vodou and Catholicism coexist in a complementary and somewhat tense relationship, Pentecostalists tend to regard them systems as diabolic. Regardless of the healing system that the villagers employ, as Brodwin argues, each of them to address pressing moral dilemmas.

### **Kyoto, Japan**

In 1973–74, Margaret Lock (1984) conducted ethnographic research on medical pluralism in Kyoto, Japan. In addition to biomedicine, modern Japan has a wide variety of East Asian medical systems and has undergone a revival of these systems, much in the same way that the United States, Canada, European societies, Australia, and New Zealand have seen the emergence of the holistic health/New Age movement. The most popular of these is *kanpo* ("the Chinese method"), a form of herbal medicine that was imported to Japan from China in the sixth century. In addition to prescribing herbs, *kanpo* doctors administer acupuncture, body manipulation, and moxibustion. *Kanpo* doctors are M.D.s who combine biomedicine and East Asian medicine. They tend to treat psychosomatic ailments in which the patients' chief complaints are tiredness, headaches, occasional dizziness, or numbness, typical symptoms emanating for the somatization of distress. Lock also reports the existence of herbal pharmacies, acupuncture clinics, moxibustion clinics, and *amma* (massage) parlors in Kyoto. She reports, however, that East Asian healers in Kyoto by and large do not apply them holistically. Conversely, Lock (1984, p. v) maintains that "in the majority of clinics, practitioners appeared to be engaged in an attempt to remove physical symptoms in a fashion reminiscent of that of most biomedical physicians, although their tools were those of traditional medicine."

### **The United States**

Based upon historical and ethnographical research, Baer has written an overview of medical pluralism in the United States (Baer, 2001). He argues that medical pluralism has historically reflected and continues to reflect class, racial/ethnic, and gender relations in U.S. society. U.S. medicine during the nineteenth century was highly pluralistic in that regular medicine shared the stage with a wide array of competing and sometimes alternative medical systems, including homeopathy, botanic medicine, eclecticism, hydropathy, Christian Science, osteopathy, and chiropractic. Although regular medicine constituted the most widespread medical subsystem, it did not completely dominate its rivals economically, politically, or socially.

As U.S. capitalism evolved from competitive to a monopoly form after the Civil War, the corporate class found it necessary to exert control over an increasingly restless populace. Along with the state and education, medicine became another hegemonic vehicle by which members of the corporate class indirectly came to legitimate capital accumulation and to filter their view of reality down to the masses. The corporate class acquired an effective tool around 1900, with the development of a germ theory and the transition to "scientific medicine," or biomedicine, a medical system based on systematic research and controlled experimentation. With its emphasis upon pathogens as the cause of disease, biomedicine provided corporate leaders with a paradigm that allowed them to neglect the social origins of disease while at the same time, in some instances, restoring workers back to a level of functional health essential to capital accumulation. Consequently, the emerging alliance between the American Medical Association, which consisted primarily of elite practitioners and medical researchers in prestigious universities, and the corporate class ultimately permitted biomedicine to achieve dominance over rival medical systems. Biomedicine quickly co-opted most homeopaths and eclectics by admitting them into their state medical societies.

The U.S. dominative medical system consists of several layers that tend to reflect class, racial/ethnic, and gender relations in the larger society. In rank order of prestige, these include: (1) biomedicine; (2) osteopathic medicine as a parallel medical system focusing on primary care; (3) professionalized heterodox medical systems (namely chiropractic, naturopathy, and apuncture and Oriental medicine); (4) partially professionalized or lay heterodox medical systems (e.g., homeopathy, massage therapy, herbalism, and midwifery); (5) Anglo-American religious healing systems (e.g., Spiritualism, Christian Science, Unity, Pentecostalism, and New Age healing); and (6) folk medical systems (e.g., Appalachian herbalism, African-American folk medicine, *curanderismo*, Native American healing systems).

As a result of corporate support for biomedicine, its practitioners came to consist primarily of white, upperand upper-middle-class males. As professionalized heterodox medical systems, osteopathy, chiropractic, and naturopathy held out the promise of improved social mobility for thousands of white lower-middle- and working-class individuals, most of whom were males, who were denied access to biomedicine due to the structural barriers created by the Flexner Report of 1910. Osteopathic medicine eventually evolved into a parallel medical system with full practice rights as a result of the paucity in primary care physicians created by the increasing trend toward specialization in biomedicine. Anglo-American religious healing systems provided outlets for white women seeking therapeutic roles. Whereas Christian Science served this role largely for uppermiddle-class women, Spiritualism and Unity did so for lower-middle-class women and Pentecostalism did so for lower-class women. Finally, folk medical systems have enabled working-class people from various ethnic groups, particularly people of color, to provide low-cost and culturally appropriate therapy for individuals at the lowest echelons of U.S. society.

## **A California Holistic/New Age Healing Center**

English-Lueck (1990) conducted an ethnography of the holistic health/New Age movement in Paraiso (pseudonym), a California community consisting largely of white upper-middle- and upper-class residents. Despite its relative ethnic homogeneity, Paraiso's residents adhered to a variety of lifestyles. These included millionaires, university students, and members of unconventional congregations, such as the Unitarian Universalist Church, the Unity School of Christianity, and the Church of Religious Science. Paraiso has numerous self-help groups, 36 schools that offer workshops and lectures on alternative medicine, and three schools that offer training in various alternative therapies, including massage, acupuncture, and hypnosis. The local community college, the university extension program, the YMCA, herbal stores, a Taoist sanctuary, and a Yogic Institute/ashram also offer workshops on alternative therapies.

Of the estimated 790–830 alternative practitioners in the Paraiso area, only 253 practice publicly. Many certified practitioners do not advertise, preferring to treat clients belonging to small, intimate networks in order to avoid legal prosecution. Alternative practitioners often exhibit therapeutic eclecticism and combine different therapies depending upon the needs and desires of their clients. Bodyworkers incorporate massage, yoga, Alexander technique, reflexology, and zone therapy. In its diversity of practitioners, Paraiso constitutes a microcosm of the holistic health movement.

## **BRINGING POWER RELATIONS INTO THE STUDY OF MEDICAL PLURALISM**

Whereas the early work on medical pluralism tended to focus on levels in plural medical systems, more recent

#### **References 115**

research on this phenomenon has to recognize that, as Stoner (1986, p. 47) asserts, "[p]luralism can now be examined as a multiplicity of healing techniques, rather than of medical systems." Indeed, in its response to the growing popularity of the holistic health movement, biomedical physicians in the United States have increasingly been incorporating various therapeutic techniques, from homeopathy, herbalism, acupuncture, and bodywork, into their regimen of treatment in an effort to create an "integrative medicine." Brodwin (1996) asserts that the "study of medical pluralism had reached a theoretical impasse" because efforts to categorize plural medical systems "often produced rigid functionalist typologies or broke down in a welter of incomparable terms." Medical anthropologists turned to concerns such as the political economy of health, biomedical hegemony, alternative medical systems in Western societies, reproduction, the mindful body, the social dynamics of clinical encounters, biotechnology, substance abuse, and AIDS.

Despite the validity of Brodwin's comments on the shortcomings of much of the research on medical pluralism, not all scholars interested in new theoretical concerns dropped their interest in medical pluralism. Indeed, various anthropologists interested in the political economy of health, including Crandon-Malamud, Brodwin, and Baer, developed an interest in how power relations shape plural medical systems. While within the context of complex societies, one medical system tends to exert, with the support of strategic elites, dominance over other medical systems, people are quite capable of dual use of distinct medical subsystems. Subaltern groups, including lower social classes, racial and ethnic minorities, and women, have often utilized and continue to utilize alternative medical systems as a forum for challenging not only biomedical dominance but also, to a degree, the hegemony of ruling groups around the world. Unfortunately, according to Elling (1981, p. 97), "Traditional medicine has been used to obfuscate native peoples and working classes." Folk healers in the modern world have shown an increasing interest in acquiring new skills and use certain biomedical-like treatments or technologies in their work, a process in which they often inadvertently adopt the reductionist perspective of biomedicine. Many Third World peoples receive regular treatment from "injection doctors" and advice from pharmacists who indiscriminately sell antibiotics and other drugs over the counter. Among the indigenous people in the highlands of Papua New Guinea, the "shoot" is perceived as "strong medicine" for a wide range of conditions, even if they do not require an injection, because it was "introduced by colonial powers who brought other 'strong' things" (Strathern & Stewart, 1999, p. 101). In essence, biomedicine and traditional medicine, despite antagonistic relations between them, exhibit a great deal of overlap and even fusion.

The growing interest of corporate and governmental elites in alternative medicine is related to the cost of hightechnology medicine. Even in countries where explicit financial and/or legal support for indigenous or alternative medicine is absent, governments prefer to support traditional healers because they recognize that the latter take some of the strain off biomedical physicians in dealing with self-limiting diseases or diseases that tend to run their course without treatment. Furthermore, in the urban setting, traditional medicine minimizes the trauma of acculturation associated with the familiar cycle of capital penetration, import-substituting industrialization, and rural to urban migration of the peasant population.

## **REFERENCES**

- Baer, H. A. (2001). *Biomedicine and alternative healing systems in America: Issues of class, race, ethnicity, and gender*. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
- Brodwin, P. (1996). *Medicine and morality in Haiti*. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Chrisman, N. J., & Kleinman, A. (1983). Popular health care, social networks, and cultural meanings: The orientation of medical anthropology. In D. Mechanic (Ed.), *Handbook of health, health care, and the health professions* (pp. 569–580). New York: Free Press.
- Crandon-Malamud, L. (1991). *From the fat of our souls: Social change, political process, and medical pluralism in Bolivia*. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Dunn, F. (1976). Traditional Asian medicine and cosmopolitan medicine as adaptive systems. In C. Leslie (Ed.), *Asian medical systems: A comparative study* (pp. 133–158). Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Elling, R. H. (1981). Political economy, cultural hegemony, and mixes of traditional and modern medicine. *Social Science and Medicine, 15A*, 89–99.
- English-Lueck, J. A. (1990). *Health in the New Age: A study in California health practices*. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
- Fabrega, Jr., H. (1997). *Evolution of healing and sickness*. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Frankenberg, R. (1980). Medical anthropology and development: A theoretical perspective. *Social Science and Medicine, 14B*, 197–207.
- Janzen, J. (1978). *The quest for therapy in lower Zaire*. Berkeley: University of California Press.