## **Sharpe, William F.**

William Forsyth Sharpe (born on June 16, 1934) is one of the leading contributors to financial economics and shared the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences in 1990 with **Harry Markowitz** and Merton Miller. His most important contribution is the **capital asset pricing model** (CAPM), which provided an equilibrium-based relationship between the expected return on an asset and its risk as measured by its covariance with market portfolio. Similar ideas were developed by John Lintner, Jack Treynor (*see* **Treynor, Lawrence Jack**), and Jan Mossin around the same time. Sharpe has made other important contributions to the field of financial economics but, given the space limitations, we only describe two of his contributions: the CAPM and the Sharpe ratio.

It is instructive to trace the approach used by Sharpe in developing the CAPM. His starting point was Markowitz's model of portfolio selection, which showed how rational investors would select optimal portfolios. If investors only care about the expected return and the variance of their portfolios, then the optimal weights can be obtained by quadratic programming. The inputs to the optimization are the expected returns on the individual securities and their covariance matrix. In 1963, Sharpe [1] showed how to simplify the computations required under the Markowitz approach. He assumed that each security's return was generated by two random factors: one common to all securities and a second factor that was uncorrelated across securities. This assumption leads to a simple diagonal covariance matrix. Although the initial motivation for this simplifying assumption was to reduce the computational time, it would turn out to have deep economic significance.

These economic ideas were developed in Sharpe's [2] *Journal of Finance* paper. He assumed that all investors would select mean-variance-efficient portfolios. He also assumed that investors had homogeneous beliefs and that investors could borrow and lend at the same riskless rate. As Tobin had shown, this implied two fund separations where the investor would divide his money between the risk-free asset and an efficient portfolio of risky assets. Sharpe highlighted the importance of the notion of equilibrium in this context. This efficient portfolio of risky assets in equilibrium can be identified with the market portfolio. Sharpe's next step was to derive a relationship between the expected return on any risky asset and the expected return on the market. As a matter of curiosity, the CAPM relationship does not appear in the body of the paper but rather as the final equation in footnote 23 on page 438.

The CAPM relationship in modern notation is

$$E[R_j] - r_f = \beta_j \left( E[R_m] - r_f \right) \tag{1}$$

where *Rj* is the return on security *j* , *Rm* is the return on the market portfolio of all risky assets, *rf* is the return on the risk-free security, and

$$\beta_j = \frac{Cov(R_j, R_m)}{Var(R_m)} \tag{2}$$

is the *beta* of security *j* . The CAPM asserts that the excess expected return on a risky security is equal to the security's beta times the excess expected return on the market. Note that this is a single period model and that it is formulated in terms of *ex ante* expectations. Note also that formula (2) provides an explicit expression for the risk of a security in terms of its covariance with the market and the variance with the market.

The CAPM has become widely used in both investment finance and corporate finance. It can be used as a tool in portfolio selection and also in the measurement of investment performance of portfolio managers. The CAPM is also useful in capital budgeting applications since it gives a formula for the required expected return on an investment. For this reason, the CAPM is often used in rate hearings in some jurisdictions for regulated entities such as utility companies or insurance companies.

The insights from the CAPM also played an important role in subsequent theoretical advances, but owing to space constraint we only mention one. The original derivation of the classic Black–Scholes option formula was based on the CAPM. Black assumed that the return on the stock and the return on its associated warrant both obeyed the CAPM. Hence he was able to obtain expressions for the expected return on both of these securities and he used this in deriving the Black–Scholes equation for the warrant price.

The second contribution that we discuss is the Sharpe ratio. In the case of a portfolio *p* with expected return *E*[*Rp*] and standard deviation *σp*, the Sharpe ratio is

$$\frac{E[R_p] - r_f}{\sigma_p} \tag{3}$$

Sharpe [3] introduced this formula in 1966. It represents the excess expected return on the portfolio normalized by the portfolio's standard deviation and thus provides a compact measure of the reward to variability. The Sharpe ratio is also known as the market price of risk. Sharpe used this ratio to evaluate the performance of mutual funds, and it is now widely used as a measure of portfolio performance.

In continuous time finance, the instantaneous Sharpe ratio, *γt* , plays a key role in the transformation of a Brownian motion under the real-world measure *P* to a Brownian motion under the risk neutral measure *Q*. Suppose *Wt* is a Brownian motion under *P* and *W*˜*<sup>t</sup>* is a Brownian motion under *Q*, then we have, from the Girsanov theorem under suitable conditions, on *γ*

$$\mathrm{d}\tilde{W}_t = \mathrm{d}W_t + \gamma_t \mathrm{d}t \tag{4}$$

It is interesting to see that the Sharpe ratio figures so prominently in this fundamental relationship in modern mathematical finance.

Bill Sharpe has made several other notable contributions to the development of the finance field. His papers have profoundly influenced investment science and portfolio management. He developed the first binomial tree model (*see* **Binomial Tree**) for option pricing, the gradient method for asset allocation optimization and returns-based **style analysis** for evaluating the style and performance of investment funds. Sharpe has helped translate these theoretical ideas into practical applications. These applications include the creation of index funds and several aspects of retirement portfolio planning. He has written a number of influential textbooks, including *Investments*, used throughout the world. It is clear that Sharpe's ideas have been of great significance in the subsequent advances in the discipline of finance.

## **References**

- [1] Sharpe, W.F. (1963). A simplified model for portfolio analysis, *Management Science* **9**(2), 277–293.
- [2] Sharpe, W.F. (1964). Capital asset prices—a theory of market equilibrium under conditions of risk, *The Journal of Finance*, **XIX**(3), 425–442.
- [3] Sharpe, W.F. (1966). Mutual fund performance, *Journal of Business* **39**, 119–138.

## **Further Reading**

Sharpe, W.F., Alexander, G.J. & Bailey, J. (1999). *Investments*, Prentice-Hall.

## **Related Articles**

**Capital Asset Pricing Model**; **Style Analysis**; **Binomial Tree**.

PHELIM BOYLE