# **Passport Options**

A passport option is a call option on a traded account, giving the buyer the right to choose his/her strategy (within some limits) and to keep all the gains generated from this strategy while letting the seller cover any losses. In contrast to other exotic options, the value of the traded account (also termed the *wealth of the buyer*) is treated as a security underlying an option. Since the buyer of this option retains profits but cannot make losses, it can be thought of as an option achieving the best total payoff for the buyer. For this reason, the passport option is sometimes called the *perfect trader option* since if a trader buys such an option, he/she cannot lose money beyond the option premium.

The passport option was first sold in foreign exchange markets in the mid-1990s and was later extended to other assets including bonds and interest rate futures. The first study on passport options was done by Hyer et al. [10] in 1997 and was heralded by the funds management industry to be a breakthrough in providing derivative-based tools for principal protection of actively managed funds. The resulting contract acts like a stop-loss, limiting the buyer's downside to the premium paid.

## **Definition and Model**

The buyer of a passport option pays a premium and is allowed to switch between short and long positions in an asset over its life. The risky asset in which positions may be taken is denoted by  $P$ . The absolute value of the number of units of asset  $P$  held at time t,  $q_t$ , must be less than or equal to some constant  $L$ . We can scale  $L$  out of the problem, and hence the restriction becomes  $|q| \leq 1$ . Gains or losses from this resulting trading strategy are accumulated, and when the option expires at  $T$ , the buyer is given any profits from the strategy, but does not pay for any losses.

If we denote the wealth at time  $t$ , generated by the trading strategy  $q_t$ , by  $X_t$ , the passport option payoff at  $T$  is

$$\max[0; X_T] = X_T^+ \tag{1}$$

The payoff of the passport option is contingent on the strategy  $q_t$  undertaken by the buyer, and thus we cannot define a unique price simply by taking the discounted risk-neutral expectation of the payoff in the usual way (see, for instance, Risk-neutral **Pricing**). We need to assume that the buyer attempts to maximize profits, and thus the seller charges the maximum price over all allowable strategies. This leads to the formulation for the option price:

$$V(t, P_t, X_t) = \sup_{|q_t| \le 1} e^{-r(T-t)} \mathbb{E}_t X_T^+$$
 (2)

where  $\mathbb{E}_t$  denotes risk-neutral expectation conditional on information at time  $t$ . Note that if the optimal strategy is not followed by the buyer, then the seller has charged more than necessary to hedge and will in fact superhedge or super-replicate.

To define a useful model, we must elaborate on how the wealth or the value of the traded account is generated. The value of this account  $X_t$ corresponding to strategy  $q_t$  follows

$$dX_t = q_t dP_t + \mu(X_t - q_t P_t) dt \tag{3}$$

with initial value  $X_0$ . The interpretation is that the buyer invests in  $q$  units of the risky asset  $P$  and the remainder earns interest rate  $\mu$  (which could be different from the riskless rate of  $r$ ). The dynamics of the risky asset  $P$  will be taken to be an exponential Brownian motion for the time being (we generalize this later):

$$dP_t = vP_t dt + \sigma P_t dW_t \tag{4}$$

where  $\nu$  is the drift (r if a nondividend paying stock,  $r - \delta$  if a dividend paying stock, or  $r - f$  if foreign currency),  $\sigma$  is the volatility of the asset, and W is a standard Brownian motion.

The Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equation (see **Expected Utility Maximization**) for the stochastic control (see Stochastic Control) problem  $(2)$  can be written as

$$\sup_{q_{r} \le 1} \left[ -rV + \dot{V} + V_{P}P\nu + (\mu X + qP(\nu - \mu))V_{X} + \frac{1}{2}\sigma^{2}P^{2}(V_{PP} + q^{2}V_{XX} + 2qV_{PX}) \right] = 0 \tag{5}$$

with boundary condition  $V(T, p, x) = x^{+}$ . The above equality holds for  $q_t = q_t^*$ , where  $q_t^*$  attains the supremum in equation (2). This is a nonlinear parabolic partial differential equation (PDE) in two space variables.

The analysis can be simplified if we make the additional assumption that  $\mu = \nu = r$ , which is the so-called symmetric case. This is assuming that money in the bank earns the riskless rate and the asset grows at rate  $r$ . Under this assumption, an explicit price for the passport option and an expression for the optimal strategy  $q_t^*$  can be found. In this case, the value of the traded account when discounted by the riskless rate becomes a martingale under the riskneutral pricing measure. This is the key point that is used in the mathematics to simplify the pricing.

Note that under the symmetric case, the stock may not pay dividends or be a foreign currency. These cases fit into the nonsymmetric framework and must be priced *via* numerical solution of the PDE. Such problems were studied by Andersen et al. [2] and Ahn *et al.* [1]. For this article, we continue to be in the symmetric framework to enable us to illustrate the main points of passport pricing.

## Pricing

There are two main techniques used in the study of passport option pricing: the partial differential equation (see Partial Differential Equations) approach and the probabilistic approach. When the model setup falls into the symmetric case, a closed-form solution is obtainable for the passport option under exponential Brownian motion *via* both of these techniques. There are two issues in solving the pricing problem: to identify the optimal strategy and to calculate the value *via* the expression in equation  $(2)$ .

## Optimal Strategy

We first give some justification for the optimal strategy. Under the symmetric framework, the optimal strategy is found to be given as

$$q_t^* = -\text{sgn}(X_t) \tag{6}$$

where

$$sgn(y) = \begin{cases} 1, & y > 0 \\ -1, & y \le 0 \end{cases} \tag{7}$$

This implies the buyer should be long up to the maximum allowed when behind  $(X_t \le 0)$  and short up to the maximum when ahead  $(Xt > 0)$ . A solution of this form is called *bang-bang* as it

switches between the two extremes. This solution can be shown to be optimal in a variety of ways. Hyer et al. [10], Andersen et al. [2], and Ahn et al. [1] reduce the dimension of the HJB equation by writing  $V(t, P, X) = P\phi(t, z)$  with  $z = X/P$  and then from this it was deduced that the strategy is optimal. In contrast, Shreve and Vecer [12] (see also Vecer and Shreve  $[13]$ ) make the same transformation and then apply a stochastic comparison theorem to achieve the result. Interestingly, the form of the optimal strategy in equation (6) remains unchanged if we generalize the asset price dynamics to allow for diffusion models (under the assumption that the diffusion coefficient is nondecreasing in  $S$ ). This is shown in [7] using stochastic coupling techniques.

#### The Option Price

We also follow Henderson and Hobson [7] (and Henderson [5] as well as Delbaen and Yor [3]) in deriving a representation for the price of the passport option using probabilistic methods. The reader is referred to these sources for more technical details and assumptions. As mentioned above, probabilistic techniques allow us to use more general asset prices, namely,  $P$  may follow a diffusion. The discounted value of the traded account and the discounted asset price are denoted by  $G_t = e^{-rt} X_t$  and  $S_t = e^{-rt} P_t$ , respectively. Then if

$$dS_t = S_t \sigma(S_t, t) \, dW_t \tag{8}$$

we have  $dG_t = q_t dS_t$ , and (under appropriate assumptions)  $G_t$  is a martingale under the risk-neutral measure. Using Tanaka's formula and the Skorokhod lemma, the passport option price in equation  $(2)$  can be represented as

$$\begin{split} &\sup_{|q_{t}| \le 1} \mathrm{e}^{-r(T-t)} \mathbb{E}_{t} X_{T}^{+} = \sup_{|q_{t}| \le 1} \mathrm{e}^{rt} \mathbb{E}_{t} G_{T}^{+} \\ &= \sup_{|q_{t}| \le 1} \mathrm{e}^{rt} \left[ G_{t}^{+} + \frac{1}{2} \mathbb{E}_{t} L_{t,T}^{G}(0) \right] \\ &= \sup_{|q_{t}| \le 1} \mathrm{e}^{rt} \left[ \frac{1}{2} \mathbb{E}_{t} (M_{T}^{*} - |G_{t}|)^{+} + G_{t}^{+} \right] \end{split} \tag{9}$$

where  $L_{t,T}^{G}(0)$  is the local time of G over time t to T (see **Local Times**) and  $M_{z}^{*} =$ 

 $\sup_{u \le z} \int_t^u -q \operatorname{sgn}(G) \, dS.$  Using the knowledge of the optimal strategy, the price is reduced to

$$\frac{1}{2}\mathbb{E}_t\left(\mathrm{e}^{rt}\sup_{t\leq r\leq T}S_r-P_t-|X_t|\right)^+ + X_t^+\qquad(10)$$

The representation  $(10)$  holds for diffusion models with the assumption that the diffusion coefficient  $S\sigma(S, t)$  is nondecreasing in S. Under the exponential Brownian motion model where  $\sigma(S, t) = \sigma$ , a constant, the passport price can be calculated explicitly to be

$$X_t^+ + \frac{1}{2} \left[ P_t(N(d) - N(d - \sigma\sqrt{T - t}) + \sigma\sqrt{T - t}(N'(d) - dN(d))) - |X_t|N(d - \sigma\sqrt{T - t}) \right]$$
(11)

where  $N$  is the cumulative normal distribution function and  $d = \frac{-\ln(1+|X_t|/P_t) + \frac{1}{2}\sigma^2(T-t)}{\sigma\sqrt{T-t}}$ . The price in equation (11) was obtained by Andersen *et al.* [2] by solving a rescaled one-dimensional PDE, by Shreve and Vecer [12] using probabilistic techniques involving a change in measure and a direct derivation of the optimal strategy *via* Hajek's theorem [4], and by Henderson [5] and Henderson and Hobson [7] using the probabilistic arguments summarized here.

## **Related Options and Further Work**

The representation of the passport option price in equation  $(10)$  shows that the price is closely related to the price of a lookback option (see Lookback **Options**). From this knowledge, we can deduce that the passport option has a high premium, since lookback options are expensive. This should be anticipated from the fact that a passport option gives the buyer downside protection and upside potential. As with lookback options, the high price of a passport option is its main drawback. The variants discussed below may be cheaper, but each of these limits the buyers trading differently.

Variants on the passport option have been developed and these options on a traded account allow the buyer to switch between positions  $\alpha_t$  and  $\beta_t$  where  $\alpha_t \leq \beta_t$  in the asset *S*. A passport option corresponds to the choice  $\alpha_t = -1$  and  $\beta_t = 1$ . Other variants introduced in [12] are the vacation call [ $\alpha_t = 0, \beta_t =$ 

1] and vacation put  $[\alpha_t = -1, \beta_t = 0]$ . They show that many options are a special case of options on a traded account, including European and American calls and puts and Asian options. Lipton [11] also discussed some similarities between the passport option and Asian options. (See articles American Options and Call Options for descriptions of European and American options and Asian Options for descriptions of Asian options.)

Passport options on futures and forwards contracts can be used to develop new hedging tools for commodity exposures. Typical hedging involves the sale or the purchase of futures or forwards, or vanilla options on the commodity. (See, for instance, Commodity Risk; Commodity Forward Curve Modeling.) These are European in nature and cannot be used to capture daily or weekly movements in future curves. A hedging strategy that allows for speculation on the upside, while retaining a downside hedge, involves a passport option on additional trading as well as a standard forward or futures hedge. This may appeal to the hedger, as they will not be any worse off than if they had hedged passively, but have upside also. Compared to buying a put option, this new strategy is expensive. However, after adjusting for cost, the new strategy has a higher probability of being in the money and thus is a better hedge against the worst outcomes. These ideas were developed in the work of Henderson et al. [9]. Further results on passport options are derived in [6] where coupling techniques and the mean comparison theorem of Hayek [4] are used to give option price comparison results. Henderson and Hobson [8] study pricing of passport options under stochastic volatility models. Delbaen and Yor [3] extend the probabilistic pricing argument to obtain a new theorem about martingales, study the case with nonzero interest rate *via* hitting times for Bessel processes, and solve the symmetric case when trading is permitted at discrete times. For results concerning discrete trading, see also [1].

## References

- [1] Ahn, H., Penaud, A. & Wilmott, P. (1999). Various passport options and their valuation, Applied Mathematical Finance 6(4), 275-292.
- [2] Andersen L., Andreasen, J. & Brotherton-Ratcliffe, R. (1998). The passport option, Journal of Computational Finance 1(3), 15-36.
- Delbaen, F. & Yor, M. (2002). Passport options, Math-[3] ematical Finance 12, 299-328.

- [4] Hajek, B. (1985). Mean stochastic comparison of diffusions, *Zeitschrift Wahrscheinlichkeitstheorie Verwandte Gebiete* **68**, 315–329.
- [5] Henderson, V. (1999). *A Probabilistic Approach to Passport Options*, PhD Thesis, University of Bath.
- [6] Henderson, V. (2000). Price comparison results and super-replication: an application to passport options, *Applied Stochastic Models in Business and Industry* **16**(4), 297–310.
- [7] Henderson, V. & Hobson, D. (2000). Local time, coupling and the Passport option, *Finance and Stochastics* **4**(1), 69–80.
- [8] Henderson, V. & Hobson, D. (2001). Passport options with stochastic volatility, *Applied Mathematical Finance* **8**(2), 97–119.
- [9] Henderson, V., Hobson, D. & Kentwell, G. (2002). A new class of commodity hedging strategies: a passport options approach, *International Journal of Theoretical and Applied Finance* **5**, 3.
- [10] Hyer, T., Lipton-Lifschitz, A. & Pugachevsky, D. (1997). Passport to success, *Risk* **10**(9), 127–131.

- [11] Lipton, A. (1999). Similarities via self-similarities, *Risk* September, 101–105.
- [12] Shreve, S. & Vecer, J. (2000). Options on a traded account: vacation calls, vacation puts and passport options, *Finance and Stochastics* **4**, 255–274.
- [13] Vecer, J. & Shreve, S. (2000). Upgrading your passport, *Risk* July, 81–83.

## **Related Articles**

**American Options**; **Asian Options**; **Call Options**; **Commodity Forward Curve Modeling**; **Commodity Risk**; **Expected Utility Maximization**; **Local Times**; **Lookback Options**; **Partial Differential Equations**; **Risk-neutral Pricing**; **Stochastic Control**.

VICKY HENDERSON