# 14 Reconstructing childhood

A critique of the ideology of adulthood<sup>1</sup>

Ashis Nandy

## I

There is nothing natural or inevitable about childhood. Childhood is culturally defined and created; it, too, is a matter of human choice. There are as many childhoods as there are families and cultures, and the consciousness of childhood is as much a cultural datum as patterns of child-rearing and the social role of the child. However, there are political and psychological forces which allow the concept of childhood and the perception of the child to be shared and transmitted. And it is with the political psychology of this shared concept and this transmission that I am concerned in the following analysis.

In the modern world, the politics of childhood begins with the fact that maturity, adulthood, growth and development are important values in the dominant culture of the world. They do not change colour when describing the transition from childhood to adulthood. Once we have used these concepts and linked the processes of physical and mental change to a valued state of being or becoming, we have already negatively estimated the child as an inferior version of the adult – as a lovable, spontaneous, delicate being who is also simultaneously dependent, unreliable and willful and, thus, as a being who needs to be guided, protected and educated as a ward. Indirectly, we have also already split the child into two: his childlikeness as an aspect of childhood which is approved by the society and his childishness as an aspect of childhood which is disapproved by the society. The former is circumscribed by those aspects of childhood which 'click' with adult concepts of the child; the latter by those which are independent of the adult constructions of the child. Childlikeness is valued, sometimes even in adults. Childishness is frowned upon, sometimes even in children.

In much of the modern world the child is not seen as a homunculus, as a physically smaller version of the adult with a somewhat different set of qualities and skills. To the extent adulthood itself is valued as a symbol of completeness and as an end-product of growth or development, childhood is seen as an imperfect transitional state on the way to adulthood, normality, full socialization and humanness. This is the theory of progress as applied to the individual life-cycle. The result is the frequent use of childhood as a design of cultural and political immaturity or, it comes to the same thing, inferiority (Nandy 1983: Chapter 1). Much of the pull of the ideology of colonialism and much of the power of the idea of modernity can be traced to the evolutionary implications of the concept of the child in the Western worldview. Much of the modern awe of history and of the historical can also be traced to the same concept. Let me give two examples from the two centuries of British colonialism in India.

No better representative can be found than James Mill (1773–1836) for the sincerity of purpose which some social reformers brought into the culture of British rule in India. The nineteenth century liberal and Utilitarian thinker's view of his private responsibility as a father meshed with his view of Britain's responsibility to the societies under its patriarchal suzerainty. Mill chose to provide, almost single-handed, an intellectual framework for civilizing India under British rule. Yet he was no xenophobe. In fact, he saw the Indian empire as a training ground and an opportunity for both colonizers and colonized. Only there was a clear difference between his perceptions of the two sets of trainees. He saw Britain as the elder society guiding the young, the immature and, hence, primitive Indian society towards adulthood or maturity, and he felt that Indian culture required more fundamental restructuring than that required by relatively advanced Western cultures. It is thus that he provided his powerful, if indirect, ideological defence of British imperialism.

Mill's gentle civilizational mission was not the only metaphor of childhood that legitimized colonialism. Cecil Rhodes put it more clearly and, one might add, darkly: 'The native is to be treated as a child and denied franchise. We must adopt the system of despotism … in our relations with the barbarous of South Africa' (Chinweizu 1978: 403). I am unable to believe that the equation Rhodes made between childhood and barbarism was only a matter of racism. It also conveyed, I suspect, a certain terror of childhood. Rhodes was one of those persons who sensed – and had to sense – that children could be dangerous. Not merely do children define childhood, they also symbolize, once we have seen through our constructions of childhood, a persistent, living, irrepressible criticism of our 'rational', 'normal', 'adult' visions of desirable societies. Whoever does not know that 'childhood is the promise of a new world – and that new world can only be destroyed before it is born' (Evgeny 1976: 282)? Colonial ideology required savages to be children, but it also feared that savages could be like children.

Rudyard Kipling (1865–1936) sought to establish a relationship between the metaphor of childhood and British Imperialism on an altogether different plane. He was another one of those pathetic adults who wanted to reclaim, through his utopian vision of British rule, a lost childhood that had once been his own. Kipling, who was brought up primarily as an Indian child and whose experience in England as a child had been devastatingly cruel, spoke of the Indian as 'half savage and half child' – the former requiring civilization, the latter socialization. As I have argued elsewhere, to the extent the Indian was half child, he represented Kipling's own Indian childhood and his Indian experiences which he wanted to recover as an adult in his heroes; to the extent the Indian was half savage, he represented Kipling's fear of his authentic Indianized self, a self he wanted to disown for the sake of his inauthentic English – and Imperialist – self, with the help of his overemphasis on laws and rules, unconditional obedience to authority, and his idea of legitimate violence inflicted or suffered for a cause (see Nandy 1983).

Mill and Kipling only used the growing ideological links between evolutionism and biological stratification in their culture (Nandy 1983). The doctrine of progress, in the guise of models of biological and psychological development, had already promoted in post-medieval Europe, particularly in the nineteenth century, the use of the metaphor of childhood as a major justification of all exploitation. As Calvinism and the spirit of Protestantism consolidated their hold over important aspects of the European consciousness, the growth of the idea of the adult male as the ultimate in God's creation and as the this-worldly end-state for everyone was endorsed by the new salience of the productivity principle and Promethean activism, both in turn sanctified by far-reaching changes in Christianity. By about the sixteenth century the imagery of the child Christ, like that of the androgynous Christ, started becoming recessive in European Christianity. Instead, a patriarchal God, with a patriarchal relationship with his suffering and atoning son, became the dominant mode in the culture. In such a culture, the child's physical weakness was already being seen as coeval with his moral and emotional weakness, which needed.to be corrected with the help of mature persons. Without this correction, the child was seen to stand midway between the lower animals and humanity. In a culture in which nature, including non-human living beings, was seen as a lower stratum of God's creation, meant for man, the chosen species of God, the child as a being closer to nature was naturally considered usable – economically, socially and psychologically.

In his well-known work, Lloyd deMause faults Philippe Aries for suggesting that childhood, as we know it, is a modern creation (deMause 1975: 5–6; Aries 1962). deMause argues that children have been ill-treated throughout history, and the modern world, if anything, is somewhat kinder to the child. He is here stating an old argument which offsets modern violence against various traditional forms of institutionalized violence.

deMause is partly correct. Viewed from this side of history, the tradition of childhood is indeed the tradition of neglect, torture and infanticide. So-called parental care and education have often been a cover for the widespread social and psychological exploitation of children. Many past societies saw children as the property of their parents, sometimes without any legal protection against parental oppression. This in turn legitimized every variety of institutional violence. Mutilation of children in some societies – in the form of castration, circumcision or beautification through folk surgery – was the norm, rather than the exception. Terrorization of children for fun or for ensuring conformity was widespread. So were sodomy and other sexual abuses of children. Often these took place with the full consent not only of the victim's parents but also of society. And, above all, infanticide was not only common; it was often a way of life. It took place in the 'civilized' West and in 'pacifist' India till the middle of the nineteenth century. (Indirect female infanticide exists in many pockets of India and other traditional third-world societies even now.)

All this does suggest that mankind has progressed towards better treatment of children and that modern societies have been kinder to children than traditional societies. Such an argument, however, ignores the qualitative changes in human oppression brought about by new, impersonal, centralizing and uniformizing forces released by the modern state system, technology and, more recently, by a social consciousness dominated by mass communications. It ignores that anomic, mechanical, dispassionate, 'banal' oppression, to adapt Hannah Arendt's overworked term, is mainly a contribution of our times to the global culture. Unlike the traditional or savage oppressor, the modern oppressor is empty within. He lives with a schizoid sense of unreality of his self and that of others. He himself is an instrument; he uses others as instruments; his reason is instrumental and he legitimizes his actions in terms of instrumentality. In sum, he lives in a world of instruments, instrumentalities and instrumentation. Such a world induces a sharp discontinuity between the oppressor and the oppressed, who no longer share the same framework of values as in the medieval witch-hunt or in premodern feudal land relations. They speak to each other from two sides of a soundproof glass wall. The estimated 1000 children who die every year at the hands of their parents in Britain – or the estimated casualty rate in the United States, ranging between  $200,000$  and  $500,000$  for physical abuse and between another 465,000 and 1,175,000 for severe neglect and sexual abuse – are not victims of mystification, black magic or false religious values (as in ritual child sacrifice or indirect female infanticide in India) or of poverty leading to neglect or murder (Light 1973 quoted in Steiner and Milius 1976: 85–86). They are victims of meaninglessness, the collapse of inter-generational mutuality, unlimited individualism and a system which views children as intrusions into what is increasingly considered the only legitimate dyad in the family – namely the conjugal unit. They are victims of a worldview which sees the child as an inferior, weak but usable version of the fully productive, fully performing, human being who owns the modern world.

Aries is, after all, not so specious when he speaks of childhood as a product of the post-medieval consciousness. Modern childhood did come into its own with the growth of industrialism, the spread of Protestant values, the emergence of modern technology and consolidation of colonialism. Children formed one of the first social groups on which the model of the brave new world promised by these forces was tried out. For the first time in important parts of the world, normal modern adulthood could no longer be conceptualized without conceptualizing its opposite, modern childhood.

The resulting construction of childhood was not a matter of genuine falseconsciousness. It did not arise from real limits to human awareness at a particular time or space. On the contrary, it involved a refusal to admit easily available data and experiences incongruent with the new ideology. If it was a false consciousness, it had built-in resistance to the recognition of its falsity.

For instance, when the Industrial Revolution gave rise to widespread use of childlabour in England, it also produced apologists of child-labour who wrote ornate, flowing prose on the good that industrial employment did to the child. Children slaving in the mills for more than twelve hours a day supposedly learned the virtues of productive work, thrift, honesty, and discipline.<sup>2</sup> But many of these apologists also sensed that it was not incidental that the 'moral growth' of the allegedly reprobate, unsaved and savage children also helped a labour-scarce economy and produced wealth for their employers. Parents who habitually sent their children to other families to work as domestic servants and in exchange took in others' children for the same purpose, as in eighteenth-century England, mostly knew what they were doing. It was not genuine unconsciousness; it was primarily rational cost-calculations with a very thin, easily penetrable, veneer of rationalization.

I do not wish to underplay the suffering of the child in non-modern societies. Nor do I want to split hairs on the actual quanta of oppression involved in different societies and times. But I do doubt the glib assumptions of a theory of progress which is surreptitiously applied to life-cycles of both persons and societies. I am conscious that if the early industrial societies introduced economies of scale in the exploitation of children, most other societies, too, have tried their hand at social and emotional exploitation of their children. There is a continuity between pre-modern and modern societies, maintained through the social inculcation in the child of culturally preferred adaptive devices, such as what psychoanalysis calls the mechanisms of ego defence. Though euphemistically called training in cultural values and cognitive styles, and seen as products of family socialization and organized education, there can be little doubt that many elements of such training would have been described as institutionalized brainwashing if the trainees were adults.

In spite of this continuity between the traditional and the modern ill-treatment of the child, the modern worldview is distinctive in stressing four special uses of children. Each of these uses can also be found in traditional cultures, but modern technology and communications and the spread of the values of modern life – particularly the growing instrumental view of interpersonal relationships – have given them a new reach and legitimacy.

First, there is greater sanction now for the use of the child as a projective device. The child today is a screen as well as a mirror. The older generations are allowed to project into the child their inner needs and to use him or her to work out their fantasies of selfcorrection and national or cultural improvement. For instance, parents may try to realize through the child their own status ambitions or to negate through him or her their own sense of economic and psychological insecurity, or they may 'bring up' the child as a double who has marital, professional and other life choices no longer open to them. Such a system can be both effective and lasting, because parents constitute the immediate environs of the child. The society, too, perceives them as providing a benevolent capsulating context for childhood. So when a parent acts out his or her inner conflicts on the child or tries to face the oppressions of society by using the child as a shield, he or she has the support of the entire society. Bruno Bettelheim once said that neither Hamlet's father nor King Lear had any business to impose on their progenies, on Hamlet and Cordelia respectively, the responsibility of avenging the wrongs done to the earlier generation. The parents in both cases tried to put reins on the next generation and 'saddle it with a burden of gratitude'. Hamlet's father, like Lear, 'put a private burden on his child's too weak shoulders'. And it is poetic justice, Bettelheim says, that Cordelia, willing to serve age by forgoing her right to a life of her own, suffers destruction along with her father (Bettelheim 1963: 69–70).

Unlike young adults such as Hamlet and Cordelia, younger children do not often have the option of breaking out of the social or educational 'traps' set for them. Their physical, emotional and socioeconomic vulnerability does not give them much chance of escape and they have to play out the institutional games devised for them. In many societies, by the time they gain social and economic autonomy, it is already too late for psychological autonomy; they continue to carry within them the passions, hates and loves of their earliest authorities. Even when oppression becomes obvious and, thus, some subjective basis for a search for autonomy is created, as in Shakespeare's *Romeo* and Juliet, the society may turn on the young with some savagery to ensure that the search is not actualized in practice. At one time, this probably was the ultimate meaning of all blood feuds and all attempts to settle historical scores. Today, it is the source of all attempts to use children to satisfy the grandest of personal and national aspirations.

Second, as already noted, childhood has become a major dystopia for the modern world. The fear of being childish dogs the steps of every psychologically insecure adult and of every culture which uses the metaphor of childhood to define mental illness, primitivism, abnormality, underdevelopment, non-creativity and traditionalism. Perfect adulthood, like hyper-masculinity and ultra-normality, has become the goal of most over-socialized human beings, and modern societies have begun to produce a large number of individuals whose ego-ideal includes the concept of adult maturity as defined by the dominant norms of the society. (Evgeny Bogat makes the important point that while every child is unique and while one expects that 'differences among persons and differences in character, should become more apparent as people grow

older … this is not the case. The differences sadly fade away, leaving only the memory of the wonderfully unique world of childhood' [Bogat 1976a: 285]). Thus, the idea of childhood as a dystopia subtly permeates most popular myths about the lost utopia of childhood and most compensatory ideas about the beauties of childlike innocence and spontaneity. As deMause points out in a different context, the idea of childhood as a lost utopia – found not in autobiographies but mainly in literature, myths and fantasies – is often built out of small episodes in remembered childhoods to serve as a wishfulfilling fantasy and as a defence against traumatic childhood memories (deMause 1975). More dominant is the idea of a fearsome childhood to which one might any time regress.

Thirdly, with greater and more intense cross-cultural contacts, childhood now more frequently becomes a battleground of cultures. This is especially true of many thirdworld societies where middle-class urban children are often handed over to the modern world to work out a compromise with cultures successfully encroaching upon the traditional life-style. For instance, even traditional rural parents may begin to send their children to modern urban schools for Western education – partly to fulfill their status ambitions and partly to create a manageable bicultural space or an interface with the modern world within the family. Nobody who has read the lives of the reformers, political leaders and writers of nineteenth century India can fail to notice that the Indian middle-class child became, under the growing cultural impact of British rule, the arena in which the battle for the minds of men was fought between the East and the West, the old and the new, and the intrinsic and the imposed. The autobiographies of Rabindranath Tagore (1944) and M. K. Gandhi (1927) provide excellent accounts of childhood as an area of adult experimentation in social change in mid-nineteenth century India. Both exemplify how the authors as children bore the brunt of conflicts precipitated by colonial politics, Westernized education and exogenous social institutions.

Nineteenth century Indian childhood was not an exception. Throughout the southern world children are being made a means of reconciling the past and the present of their societies. With the accelerating pace of social change, even in many modern societies children are expected to help their elders cope, with the contradictory social norms introduced into the society by large-scale techno-cultural changes, and to vicariously satisfy their elders' needs for achievement, power and self-esteem. (These are the needs a modern society implants in all its members but can allow only a handful to satisfy. The mythology of modernity rests on the belief that these needs can be satisfied if only an individual works hard, is adaptable and psychologically healthy. That is, there is no insurmountable institutional constraint on anyone having a sense of achievement, potency and personal worth; all failures in this respect, the modern belief goes, are actually failures of culpable individuals, not of structures.) As the modern society typically promises to meet these needs in exchange for productive, impersonal, monetized, industrial work in a competitive setting, the culture of productive work gradually takes over all other areas of life. It is in modern society that we see the remarkable spectacle of even the child's early attainments in the area of sphincter control, speech, literacy and school work becoming instruments of parental drive for performance, competition, productivity and status. This is the tacit politics in the psychopathology of everyday life in many societies today.

Fourthly, societies dominated by the principle of instrumental reason and consumerism mystify the idea of childhood more than the idea of the child. This differential mystification ensures that the idea of the child is more positively cathected than the real-life child. The image of the child is in fact split and those aspects of childhood which are incongruent with the culture of adult life are defined as part of a natural savage childhood and excluded from the mythological idea of the child as a fully innocent, beautifully obedient, self-denying and non-autonomous being. In its most extreme form, the child is appreciated when he or she is least genuinely childish or  $\text{authentic} - \text{in fact, only when he or she meets the adult's concept of a good child.}$ 

The concept of a good child, derived from the objective and subjective demands of adults, finds expression in various ways. For instance, in many traditional societies such as the Indian and the Chinese, the child may be seen as a reincarnation of some familial spirit, most frequently of one's parents' parents.<sup>3</sup> But even when the child is seen as a good omen or as the incarnation of a good spirit, there may be a touch of instrumentality to it. Thus, a male child in a patriarchal system may be seen as a means of ensuring the continuity of lineage. He may be expected to prepare himself to look after the welfare of his ancestors, and ensure their safe passage to the life after death or look after their after-life comforts from this world through proper rituals and other religious ceremonies.

Modern parents also see children as sources of economic security, old-age insurance and as allies in the cruel world of competition, work and day-to-day politics. Many cultures and individuals have elaborate defences against recognizing this aspect of their relationship with children. Of course, all interdependence is not tainted. Economic and social mutuality is no less legitimate than psychological mutuality. But when cultures help individuals to repress the contractual aspects of the adult-child relationship and help institutionalize a totally benevolent, self-sacrificing concept of parenthood, social consciousness gets used to perceiving only a one-way flow of material benefits from parents to the child. The child, too, is socialized to such perceptions of benevolence and sacrifice and is constantly expected by the outside world as well as by his inner self to make reparative gestures towards his parents.

Thus, we seem to have come full circle to the first use of childhood we have described. If Hamlet seems too mythical a figure telling too apocryphal a story, every age has produced its version of the myth of the obligated progeny sacrificing his life to right real or imaginary wrongs done to his parents or to his parent's generation.

### Π

Until recently, in most societies, high birth and high mortality rates ensured a plurality or near-plurality of children in the population. When the ideology of adulthood is superimposed on such social profiles, it beautifully sanctifies a subtle abridgement of democratic rights. Even in societies not dominated by this ideology  $-$  in societies where the child has often enjoyed a certain dignity, autonomy and, as in India, a clear touch of divinity<sup>4</sup> – the encroachment of the modern world on the traditions of nurture and child-rearing is helping to turn the childhood of the third world into an ethnic variant of the first world.

Thus, children are getting homogenized as a target as well as a metaphor of oppression and violence. Their story is becoming, to borrow Elise Boulding's expression for the history of women, another underside of history. Though some awareness of the role of the child in human civilization is reflected in religions and myths, it is mostly the lesser minds of the modern times that have empathized with the child: an occasional

Engels, not Marx, examining the political economy of the family and, indirectly, of childhood; an-occasional Dickens, not Dostoevsky or Thomas Mann, anticipating twentieth century authoritarianism in the treatment meted out to the nineteenth century child.

It is an indicator of the power of modern consciousness that even Gandhi's Gandhism failed when it came to his own children. Though his model of social change was a majestic indictment of the metaphor of childhood legitimizing colonialism and modernity, his attempt to introduce the concept of social intervention or service in the Indian worldview did presume a non-traditional, almost Calvinist concept of the sinful, selfish child who had to be moulded into a socially useful being. Corollary-wise, in his personal life, too, Gandhi forced his sons to live in a way that would concretize his own concept of the ideal child and atone for their birth in the sin of sexuality (see Erikson 1969; Payne 1968). In consequence, Gandhi's eldest son Haridas was fully destroyed. He tried his hardest not to play out Gandhi's scenario for an eldest son's life, preferring to pursue to its nadir a lifestyle defined by blind negation of his enveloping father (Payne 1968). Alcohol, prostitutes, rejection of Hinduism, and a self-centred hedonism were not only the passions of Haridas but also his flawed instruments of a selfdestructive search for autonomy. In the process, he provided a classic instance of oedipal conflict in a culture which had traditionally shown a low salience of such conflicts.

If Gandhi, too, partly gave in to the modern concept of childhood, one can imagine the universalizing and homogenizing power of the concept. Here was a man who had not only rejected the ideology of modernity but had also defied the implied homology between the adult-child relationship and the West-East encounter under colonialism. Yet he was unable to extend his dissent against the ideology of adulthood from aggregates to persons, as he did so successfully in the case of the man-woman relationship and the ideology of hyper-masculinity (Nandy 1980).

For intimations of that other dissent against the ideology of adulthood one is forced to turn, paradoxically, to the best-known ideologue of normality and adulthood of our century, Sigmund Freud. Unlike Gandhi, Freud was totally oblivious of the larger political use being made of the ideology of adulthood. But then he was perfectly aware of the micropolitics of the family and that of the process of socialization.

It was Freud who first spelt out for the moderns the way exploitation of children ensures the persistence of a tortured childhood within each adult as a flawed consciousness. He called such consciousness abnormal personality, one which could not own up the remnants of an oppressed childhood within it, because it also included norms internalized from the ideology of adulthood. Psychopathology, in such a model, is a *double entendre*. It is an apparently apolitical, rational attempt to cope with inescapable memories of oppression, the so-called reality principle being not, as social consensus and psychiatric expertise would have it, a value-neutral objectivity, but a compromised apperception of reality erected by the inescapable structures of oppression. Secondly, psychopathology is a non-critical adaptation to the pathology of a fractured interpersonal world where the unreality of conventional reality and the abnormality of conventional normality organize a child's early environment.

The double meaning of psychopathology is one of Freud's major legacies. Patriarchal and conservative in personal life and overtly committed to normality and adulthood, Freud left behind in this dialectics of meaning an instrument of dissent from the ideology of normality and adulthood. It was this legacy which made the social critic Freud, in spite of all attempts to institutionalize him as a positivist applied psychologist, a reluctant political rebel and visionary of a just world. In that rebellious, 'savage' Freud, a part of the culture of modern science suspended its social-evolutionism – to affirm that childhood and adulthood were not two fixed phases of the human life-cycle (where the latter had to inescapably supplant the former) but a continuum which, while diachronically laid out on the plane of life history, was always synchronically present in each personality. And that the repression of children in the name of socialization and education was the basic model of all 'legitimate' modern repression, exactly as the ideology of adulthood (including the glorification of work, performance and productivity as normal and mature) was the prototypical theory of progress, designed to co-opt on behalf of the oppressors the visions of the future of their victims. Admittedly, the metaphor of oppression was not used by Freud, impressed as he was by the rather simple, mechanistic versions of historicism and scientism (which blunted the critical edge of his concepts such as infantile sexuality, civilization as repression, and the reality principle). But, then, all social criticism does not have the obligation to be either self-aware or self-consistent.

In sum, Freud implied (1) that the use of children for acting out the emotional conflicts of adulthood, in turn built on the ruins of an oppressed childhood, distorted the world of the child; (2) that 'mental illness' was only a means of protecting oneself from the inescapable arbitrary victimhood experienced in childhood; and (3) that the oppression of socialization was the root of the civilizational discontents of our times and the ultimate psychopathology of everyday life. The repression within, to use a now worn-out expression, invariably found its social counterpart in repression without.

I suspect that the early hostility to Freud was only partly due to his concept of infantile sexuality, which in any case was implied in the Western concept of the savage, sinful child. Freud's stress on such sexuality only provided a humane interpretation of the fearful awareness that was already there in the recesses of the Western mind. The hostility to Freud was also due to his theories which hinted at the oppressiveness of the idea of adulthood and the hollowness of the theory of progress when applied to a person's life-cycle. Human childhood, Freud's meta-psychology seemed to suggest, was the basic design of a society where physical and material dominance set the pace for emotional and cultural life, by forcing human subjectivity to adapt to the physical and material dependency of the child. It is the modern childhood-which-survives-childhood from which Freud sought to liberate his civilization.

On this plane, Freud tried to do for the person what Gandhi tried to do for the aggregate: to free humanity from the institutionalized violence which used the metaphor of childhood and the doctrine of progress as spelt out in the dominant postmedieval concept of history. Both tacitly agreed that childhood was a culture, a quality of living and a distinctive collection of cognitive skills, emotional and motivational patterns which modernity sought to disown or repress. Liberating the child or the savage was, thus, a means of liberating the adult and the civilized from the straitjacket of 'normal' adulthood and civility (Nandy 1983: Chapter 1).

I doubt if any other ideological formulation could have been more subversive of the language of modernity at that point of time. The formulation sought not only to protect the child and the savage but also to alter the language of social change and to unmask the universalism of modernity as only another legitimacy for ethnocides. If we see children as carriers of a culture which is politically and socially vulnerable but is nonetheless intrinsically valuable, we also change the nature of our search for secular salvation. Analogously, cultures have a right to live not because they can be saved or promoted to a higher state of civilization but because of the alternatives they give us in their distinctive philosophies of life. Because ultimately they are willing to live out these alternatives on our behalf.

Freud was not a cultural relativist. In his model, childhood can be assessed in terms of the unique orientation to the natural and interpersonal worlds it represents. Cultural criticism of childhood, too, is legitimate; only it has to be ventured in the context of the biological, environmental and interpersonal demands of childhood – that is, in the context of both the psycho-ecology of childhood and the politics of cultures in our times. The model fears the arrogance of parents or societies which presume to 'bring up' their children; it sees family as a psycho-social space within which the culture of the adult world intersects and, sometimes, confronts the world of the child. Ideally, this sharing of space should take place on the basis of mutual respect. That it does not is a measure of our fear of losing our own selfhood through our close contacts with cultures which dare to represent our other selves, as well as a measure of our fear of the liminality between the adult and the child which many of us carry within ourselves. This is the liminality Freud worked through in his interpretation of psychopathology. This is also the liminality Gandhi had to face openly while battling the ideology of colonialism.

Liberation from the fear of childhood is also liberation from the more subtly institutionalized ethnocentrism towards past times. Elsewhere, I have discussed the absolute and total subjection of the subjects of history, who can neither rebel against the present times nor contest the present interpretations of the past. I have argued that the corollary of the modern attitude to the child is the tendency of the modern child within each modern adult to apply to past times the same doctrine of progress which is applied to the child by the adult (Nandy 1987; also 1983: Chapter 1). The other name of modern childhood is personal history. Not knowing this is to be caught in the causality of history; knowing this is to reduce history to non-causal remembered past (cf. Keen 1978). The struggle to disown one's 'childish' past in personal life is also an attempt to disown one's collective past as a pre-history or as a set of primitivisms and traditions. The struggle to own up the child within oneself is an. attempt to restore wholeness in ruptured human relationships and experiences.

Is all attempt to improve or educate children, then, also an attempt to self-improve? Is every violation of children an attempt to self-destruct? Perhaps. One accepts in children what one accepts in oneself; one hates in children what one hates in oneself. Turn this into a conscious process and what looks like educating and rearing children turns out to be a pathetic attempt to compensate for unfulfilled and unrealized self-images and private ideals. Children, too, bring up their elders.

I must not end this argument leaving the impression that there is something intrinsically glamorous about childhood, or even about the innocence and victimhood of the child. That glamorization, too, is a defence against feared memories of childhood. The use of the child as a symbol of counter-cultures or utopias has often been a correlate of the use of the child as a symbol of dystopias. Children represent the contradictions and pathologies of cultures as part of an inescapable struggle for self-preservation. Adults, too, may sometimes need to be protected from them. Though the need for such protection has not arisen in the past, it may do so in the future. The vulnerability of the child in the past was primarily physical. As the importance of physical power diminishes in modern social relations, the power relations between age groups may change in the same way that it is changing between the sexes. So, while the inequality between the adult and the child may not automatically decline, it may come to depend less on brute force and more on institutions, technologies and the politics of age in the future. (Witness for instance the case of the youth. The youth 'revolutions' of the late 1960s in the West were also an effort to institutionalize the growing power of the youth in the Western political economy as consumers and as voters who were becoming more numerous and mobilizable both in absolute terms and in comparison, with other sections of the population.)

Until now the main force behind the ill treatment of children has been the social structures and processes which have forced large sections of men and women to lose their self-esteem, and then forced them to seek that lost self-esteem through their children. From the violence-prone Spartan society (which saw its children only as future warriors for Sparta and, to test their 'toughness', exposed a large proportion of them to death at birth) to the English miners at the time of the Industrial Revolution (working fifteen to eighteen hours a day and coming back to beat up or rape their own children). violated, brutalized adulthood has been the other side of violated, brutalized children.

We thus come full circle. If violated men and women produce violated children, violated children in turn produce violated adults. Fortunately, this apparently vicious circle can be read the other way too. The ideology of adulthood has hidden the fact that children see through our hypocrisy perfectly and respond to our tolerance and respect fully. Our most liberating bonds can be with our undersocialized children. And the final test of our skill to live a bicultural or multicultural existence may still be our ability to live with our children in mutuality.

A plea for the protection of children is, thus, a plea for an alternative vision of the good society on the one hand, a vision in which the plurality of cultures and paradoxically that of visions themselves are granted, and a plea for recognizing the wholeness of human personality on the other.

#### Notes

- 1 This is an abridged version of the article that appeared in Ashis Nandy, *Traditions, Tyranny*, and Utopias: Essays in the Politics of Awareness (Delhi; New York: Oxford University Press, 1987).
- 2 Exactly as employers of child labourers in South Indian match and fire-works factories have recently produced elegant justifications for their employment practices in response to an indictment published by a civil rights worker. See the controversy following the publication of Kothari (1983a, 1983b).
- 3 deMause (1975) even has a name for this; he calls it the 'reversal reaction'.
- 4 For example, on the Indian tradition of child rearing see Kakar (1979).

#### References

Aries, Philippe (1962) Centuries of Childhood: A Social History of Family Life, New York: Knopf.

Bettelheim, B. (1963) 'The problem of generations', in E. H. Erikson (ed.) Youth: Change and Challenge, pp. 64–92. New York: Basic Books.

Bogat, Evgeny (1976a) 'Boys and girls', in Eternal Man: Reflections, Dialogues, Portraits, pp. 279-87, Moscow: Progress Publishers.

(1976b) 'The great lesson or childhood', in *Eternal Man: Reflections, Dialogues, Portraits*, pp. 288-93, Moscow: Progress Publishers.

Chinweizu (1978) The West and the Rest of Us. London: NOK.