# **LAW, POLITICS, AND CONSTITUTIONAL HEGEMONY**

*the Supreme Court, jurisprudence, and demosprudence*

# UPENDRA BAXI<sup>\*</sup>

## **I. INTRODUCTION**

'CONSTITUTIONAL hegemony'—the justified true belief that constitutional interpretation has a social effect and is politically important, if not also decisive—is an essentially contested concept often conflated with interpretational judicial hegemony. However, the supermajorities in the legislature and the relatively autonomous executive also interpret the constitutional text and the intent. Constitutional interpretation is undertaken by the civil society, market, media, armed opposition insurgent groups, and other non-state actors. Hegemony is the name that we give to the salient contemporaneous viewpoint. A study of Indian constitutional interpretation from the perspective of all these actors alone can give a full view of constitutional hegemony in action. $<sup>1</sup>$ </sup>

An abiding message of Antonio Gramsci, who invented the term social theory, has been that any account of hegemony has to be tentative and partial; the hegemonic is an attempt to describe the appearance of (not the actual production of) political consent or consensus. How that appearance is constructed and achieved is a real problem in studying hegemony. Liberal constitutional theory insists on the 'separation of powers', which counsels that the 'rule of law', being best attained by distributing powers among the legislature, executive, and the judiciary, is just one important mythical device for securing constitutional hegemony.

Three forms of *prudence*, or bodies of thought, determine the province of constitutional hegemony: these are *legisprudence* (the principles or theory of legislation that take it beyond the contingency of politics), *jurisprudence* (that determine the principles, precepts, standards, doctrines, maxims of law, and the concept of law), and *demosprudence* (judicial review process and power that enhance life under a constitutional democracy). How the three bodies of wisdom, these 'different multiplicities' (as Tully called constitutional pluralism), have played out in the making and working of the Indian Constitution, especially through the dynamics of the Supreme Court of India, is a question worth pursuing, but we mainly explore here demosprudence of the Indian Supreme Court (the Court, hereafter). The task is limited, but historical contexts are large as well as shifting and the social meanings of the original 1950 Constitution are indeed all but legible. In particular, I revisit the notion of adjudicatory leadership and rework the notion of demosprudence in the context of the Supreme Court of India and the changing relation between jurisprudence and demosprudence.

My argument is simple: the Court now is inclined towards demosprudence, though its early jurisprudence was also tinged with it. Demosprudence is a novel conception and was introduced in American literature by Lani Guinier, $\frac{2}{3}$  though namelessly practised by the Court since its inception. Guinier is concerned with the phenomenon, rare in US judicial history, of oral dissent: the argument is that 'oral dissents, like the orality of spoken word poetry or the rhetoric of feminism, have a distinctive potential to root disagreement about the meaning and interpretation of constitutional law in

a more democratically accountable soil<sup>'.</sup><sup>3</sup> Ultimately, 'they may spark a deliberative process that enhances public confidence in the legitimacy of the judicial process' as oral dissents 'can become a crucial tool in the ongoing dialogue between constitutional law and constitutional culture'. <sup>4</sup> Professor Guinier moves to the more general argument about 'demosprudence' as 'a democracy-enhancing jurisprudence'.<sup>5</sup>

Unlike traditional jurisprudence, demosprudence is not concerned 'primarily with the logical reasoning or legal principles that animate and justify a judicial opinion'; rather it is 'focused on enhancing the democratic potential of the work of lawyers, judges, and other legal elites. Demosprudence through dissent attempts to understand the democracy-enhancing potential implicit and explicit in the practice of dissents'.<sup>6</sup> It 'describes lawmaking or legal practices that inform and are informed by the wisdom of the people'.<sup>7</sup>

We are here not concerned with instructive criticisms of the US judicial history, $\frac{8}{5}$  the possible extensions of the term in the comparative constitutional studies-type subjects, <sup>9</sup> or its rich potential for the UN agencies<sup>10</sup> and the question how far Guinier embraces both legisprudence and demosprudence. Rather, when we focus on the Supreme Court of India, we are struck with the fact that it discovered demosprudence much before the term was invented by American constitutional scholars!

As innovated by the Indian Supreme Court, demosprudence speaks to us severally. It serves as a marker of the emergence of a dialogic adjudicative leadership between/amidst the voices of human and social suffering. The Court does not merely relax the concept of standing but radically democratises it; no longer has one to show that one's fundamental rights are affected to move the Supreme Court or the High Courts, but it remains sufficient that one argues for the violations of the worst-off Indian citizens and persons within India's jurisdiction. Other-regarding concern for human rights has now become the order of the day and this concern has prompted a creative partnership between active citizens and activist Justices. New human rights norms and standards not explicitly envisaged by the original constitutional text stand judicially invented.

# **II. THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA**

The makers of the Indian Constitution envisaged the Supreme Court of India as an apex *adjudicative bureaucracy*, a final arbiter of the 'doings' of other courts in the hierarchy, not as an institutional political actor. They conferred vast jurisdiction<sup>11</sup> but contemplated a modest role for the Court: it remains responsible and empowered to secure a centralised production of *juristic* meaning of the Indian Constitution yet the production of its *social* meaning—the tasks of governance, development, and redistributive justice—lay entirely within legisprudence—the province and function of the elected public officials.

The world's largest ever written constitution is an unparalleled exercise in verbosity. It provides a 'flexible' democratic constitution with liberal powers for its amendment; the 395 Articles of the Constitution (not mentioning various clauses and sub-clauses) stand divided into twenty-three Parts (each comprising several chapters and expanded further by subsequent constitutional amendments), and detailed further now in twelve Schedules, not to speak of over 100 amendments—a huge exercise in the elaboration of parliamentary (and even executive) supremacy. Indeed, the text scales some

extraordinary ludic heights in specifying that 'unless the context otherwise requires', the terms 'article', 'clause', 'part', 'schedule' mean what the Constitution so designates (Article 366); and Article 367 goes even further to say that a foreign State means a State other than India; that laws include ordinances; more importantly, it subjects constitutional interpretation to the colonial General Clauses Act (as from time to time amended by Parliament)! The futility of overwriting the constitutional text stands belied by Indian experience and development.

A most overworked and understaffed Apex Court exercises overarching powers of paper over (now twenty-eight) High Courts' determinations in civil and criminal matters (Articles 132–34), further reinforced by Article 136 residual jurisdiction, liberally exercised, empowering the Court to grant at its discretion an appeal by way of special leave 'from any judgment, decree, determination, sentence or order passed or made by any court or tribunal in the territory of India'. Understandably, then, even dated statistics tell their own story—it had as of July 2009, 53,000 pending cases (as compared with the overall pendency of 400,000 before High Courts and 20.7 million before district and local courts).

Many structural and procedural features contribute to the situation of unwarranted delays in judicial appointments; unprincipled bench size given its vast jurisdiction, the Court today comprises thirty-one Justices (from an initial count of eight Justices in 1950) servicing today about 1.2 billion Indian citizens; with the iron law of superannuation (age of 65 years) further aggravated by the average tenure of individual Justices at the Court being about two–three years. Further, very few Indian Chief Justices of India had the constitutional luck to serve the Court for long periods. Supreme Court Justices stand elevated from (now twenty-eight) State High Courts (with a retiring age limit of 62 years). The Court rarely sits as a 'full Court'; most of the work is done by two/three-judge benches or panels constituted by the Chief Justice of India; often a panel of five Justices (named the 'constitutional bench') is resorted to; and at times larger benches of seven or nine Justices stand empanelled to resolve conflicts over prior precedents. Fragmented and fluctuating bench structures accentuate the loss of institutional cohesion in myriad ways. $\frac{12}{12}$  Yet, some quantitative methods provide fresh starts in understanding the summit judicial conduct.<sup>13</sup> Asymmetries in the bench-bar relationships further signify the fact that the Court remains relatively powerless in controlling its own proceedings. Despite any attempt at regulating the practices of frequent adjournments, prolix argumentation (often lasting for weeks, even months) still remains the 'dis-order' of the day! The national adjudicative time thus remains at the sufferance of a politically fractionalised Supreme Court Bar, resting on an egregiously erroneous assumption that adjudicative reforms assault the independence of the Indian legal profession.

In the Indian context, jurisprudence, as placing some substantial demands of adjudicatory discipline, remains a casualty; the discipline of *stare decisis* suffers a tissue rejection; often, smaller benches act without respect for larger bench decisions. Diversity of concurring opinions, even functioning as disguised partial dissents, and the practices of retroactive explanation of what a particular Justice meant in an earlier decision<sup>14</sup> make difficult the discovery of the law declared by the Court as binding on all courts (and other judicial authorities: Article 141). And yet the Court produces demosprudence and jurisprudence, making adjudicatory leadership (a better notion than judicial activism) an enormously complex task, directing attention to 'organisational' and 'hermeneutic' leadership and the 'political' (as sites of constitutional striving by the Court producing changing meanings of rights, development, governance, and justice)—in sum 'India's living Constitution'.<sup>15</sup> At stake also remain the shifting bases of the legitimation of the Court as political

institution, assuming fully the responsibility for the co-governance of the nation.

#### **III. ORGANISATIONAL ADJUDICATORY LEADERSHIP**

Organisational leadership is my way of identifying the Court's assumption of self-directing powers. The Court in a remarkable feat seized the power to appoint Justices and transfer (High Court) Justices in 1993 by holding in the 'Judges Case'<sup>16</sup> that the constitutional requirement of 'consultation' meant the same thing as 'concurrence' of the CJI; it then proceeded to subject the primacy of the CJI by inventing a collegium of the five seniormost (including the CJI) deciding with unanimity, whose say on judicial appointments will be final. $\frac{17}{12}$ 

This adjudicative feat stands notably 'justified' in *Subhas Sharma v Union of India*, a three-judge bench decision, addressing the virtue of a '*non-political judiciary*' as 'crucial to our chosen political system', 'the *vitality* of democratic process', the 'ideals of social and economic *egalitarianism*', the 'imperatives of a *socio-economic transformation* envisioned by the Constitution as well as *the rule of law* and the great values of *liberty and equality*'. <sup>18</sup> This normative overkill does not fully withstand analytical scrutiny.<sup>19</sup>

Attempts at a National Judicial Commission do not cure the opacity of judicial elevations. Even those—including some distinguished incumbent CJI and some superannuated Justices, the active grapevine constituted by some incumbent Justices as well as by the leaders of highly politicised and fractal leadership of the Indian Bar—who criticise the functioning of the judicial collegium do not want a return of the days when a Union Law Minister might repeat his story of having 'judges in his pockets'. The Ninety-Ninth Amendment to the Constitution, which introduced a new system for appointments in place of the collegium, was recently struck down by the Supreme Court as violating of the basic structure the Constitution.<sup>20</sup>

Further, a constitutional custom that elevates the seniormost judge of the Court as the Chief Justice, thus removing the vice of political patronage, stands judicially endorsed. Indira Nehru Gandhi explicitly breached the custom during the Emergency Rule (1975–76) by superseding the seniority rule, and this raised considerable public discussion concerning her justification of an inchoate doctrine of 'committed judiciary'. However, the custom also means some spectacularly short tenures of Chief Justices (at times from eighteen days to a few months!). Concerns about social diversity and plurality in the composition of the Court have frequently emerged, and more subtle forms of court packing have ensured that women Justices on the Court remain as few as possible and that a woman Justice may be available as the Chief Justice, $\frac{21}{2}$  though a constitutional custom as regards the elevation of Muslim and Dalit Justices seems to have evolved.

## **IV. HERMENEUTIC ADJUDICATORY LEADERSHIP (HAL)**

HAL is centrally involved in resolving the tangle of the self-organisation of the Court. Should we for that reason alone collapse the two is a question worth considering; organisational leadership addresses much wider contexts than judicial elevations (for example, the Court has acted as a pay commission for 'subordinate' judiciary). Organisational leadership involves HAL and yet is distinct,

because HAL directs interpretive energies beyond the institution of the judiciary itself or its selfdirected collective composition to governance itself.

The Court has now assumed the power of co-governance of the nation and enshrined it in the basic structure doctrine. Socially responsible criticism (SRC) may no longer pose a concern jurisprudentially—that is by recourse to some pre-existing conceptions about the judicial role and function. Rather, SRC (the commentariat which functions as a new proletariat) ought to address the quality of demosprudence, the issue of how Justices talk about and listen to the worst-off peoples and strive to realise (in Hannah Arendt's difficult terms) 'the right to have rights'.<sup>22</sup> Who do the Justices listen to when they refer to 'people' or the 'demos'? Are they better listening posts in a plebiscitary democracy than the legislators?

Clearly, the earlier rules of jurisprudence no longer apply. *Stare decisis*, for all its indeterminacies, was an engine for the growth of common law jurisprudence; the Indian demosprudence bids 'adieu' to it even in terms of daily jurisprudence of the Court, let alone the realm of social action litigation (SAL). The 'gravitational force' (to deploy Ronald Dworkin's term) of precedent no longer governs the demosprudence of the Court; the construction of demos is not precedent-minded but regards the doing of justice or mitigation of injustice as its prime task.

Is this aversion to precedent by the Court both jurispathic and jurisgenerative (to use Robert Cover's distinction)? How far may it refuse to follow any institutional rule or discipline laid down by other institutions of co-governance and how far may it reshape these? And if the Court is thought of in the immortal image of Goswami J as the last recourse for the 'bewildered and oppressed' Indian humanity, may it find liberation or conformity to judicial self-discipline (jurisprudence) as a way of attaining the best for the worst off (demosprudence)? And how far may its successful demosprudence erase the public memory of the fact that even when the Court presents itself in the image of a new social movement, it must also remain at the end of the day an assemblage of State sovereignty/suzerainty? We need to answer some hard questions both of constitutional demosprudence and jurisprudence in order to retain the promise of constitutionalism in all its senses.

No bright lines between *legal* and *constitutional* interpretation seem to exist now. Nor do the complex genealogies of constitutional and legal cultures: if 'civil' law cultures classify private and public law, its common law counterpart often articulates the traditions of constitutional common law. Whereas the continental cultures celebrate a strict discipline of the 'proportionality' test, common law constitutionalism leans towards 'balancing' competing and conflicting interests. The Indian experience offers a more complex and ambivalent instance.

The Court is, of course, a State ideological and coercive apparatus, and an aspect of the State. It has sustained overall not just the colonial laws (such as the Official Secrets Act and the offence of sedition entailing forms of official love for duly elected governments), but has also upheld against human rights-based challenges some dragnet and Draconian post-Independence, frankly 'neocolonial', laws. <sup>23</sup> The Court now downgrades '*legalism*' (an ethical virtue of following rules even when they produce undesirable results); and '*restraintivism*' (even when they have the power, they should not enter the 'political thicket') as tools for judging. Instead, it frankly resorts to '*pragmatism*' (even as they expand the scope of their power, Justices ought to respect some institutional limits and act always with regard to the overall acceptability and effectiveness of their decisions) and '*activism*' (Justices ought to so act as to protect and promote human rights and constitutional conceptions of justice).

Confronted with a mélange of socially and culturally grounded expectations, the Court has not as fully as it may engaged women, sexual minorities, children, and First Nations as taking rights seriously as human rights. Even so, and increasingly since the 1960s, the Court has tended to assume the aspect of a new social movement, especially via SAL; further, it has also emerged as a discursive platform for governance transparency, bordering on an enunciation of constitutional right against corruption in high places. Thus the Court today assumes full judicial powers of directing and monitoring State investigative and enforcement agencies such as the CBI (Central Bureau of Investigation) and the constitutionally established CVC (Central Vigilance Commission). SAL has survived legislative supermajorities in the past and has grown because of coalitional forms of national governance (although now, with the sixteenth Parliament, this trend has been interrupted).

The Court goes beyond these; for example straddling the conventional distinctions of judicial activism/restraint, it invents a contrast between juristic activism/restraint, relatively unknown to the received wisdom of Anglo-American prescriptions of judicial role and function. Styles of 'juristic activism<sup> $24$ </sup> comprise a genre in which Justices elaborate future decisional pathways without applying judicial reasoning in an instant case to its own specific outcome. For example, *Olga Tellis v Bombay Municipal Corporation <sup>25</sup>* enunciates the future of a new constitutional right to shelter for Mumbai pavement-dwellers, though in the instant result condemning them to acts of executive discretion to uproot them from their necessitous habitats! This disrupts a 'universal' notion of the very idea of judgment as marking the unity of judicial reasoning and result; yet, at the same time, it also births the practices of 'suggestive jurisprudence'. To offer an example, the anxious murmur articulated by Hidayatullah J, in *Sajjan Singh v State of Rajasthan*, while sustaining the Seventeenth Amendment, led to a radical transformation of Indian constitutionalism. 26 He there said that the Constitution did not intend Part III rights to be mere 'playthings' of 'majorities', paving the way for the momentous decision in *IC Golak Nath v State of Punjab* (immunising these rights from the runaway viral powers of constitutional amendment) <sup>27</sup> and the 1973 *Kesavananda Bharati v State of Kerala* (hereinafter *Kesavananda*) <sup>28</sup> decision that judicially rewrote Article 368 powers of constitutional amendments, subjecting it fully either to the practices of eventual judicial endorsement or to the power to declare amendments as 'unconstitutional'.

*Kesavananda* in some wafer-thin 'majority' outcomes via a thousand-page decision, riven with some indecipherable putative concurring and dissenting plurality of opinions, still enunciates the doctrine of the Indian Constitution personality subject to constitutional judicial power. The reach of amendatory power may no longer offend the 'basic structure' of constitutional governance or its 'essential features'—severally described as 'democracy', 'equality', 'federalism', 'rule of law', 'secularism', and 'socialism'. The decisional core, of course, remains the notion of judicial power as an essential feature—a core that results in a co-sharing with Parliament of constituent power by the apex Justices. Initially politically opposed, today this articulation of adjudicatory leadership no longer remains an affair of contentious polities, even fully echoed in many a South Asian adjudicature, notably Bangladesh, Nepal, and Pakistan.<sup>29</sup>

The *Kesavananda* constitutional 'bootstrapping' interestingly further strengthens its constitutional and political legitimation; its basic structure doctrine now extends beyond the implied limits on the amendatory powers; thus in *SR Bommai v Union of India* the Court outlaws the Presidential powers to suspend or dissolve duly elected State legislatures under Article 352.<sup>30</sup> Further still, it now even transforms the basic structure doctrine into a canon of constitutional interpretation reaching out almost fully to judicial deliberation/invigilation of the quotidian exercises of State legislative and executive/administrative powers.<sup>31</sup>

#### **V. THE POLITICS AND THE LAW OF CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENTS**

The Article 368 powers and procedures of constitutional amendment were all too frequently deployed in the Nehruvian era (1950–64) marked by ascendency of parliamentary supremacy with a constitutionally unbecoming hostility towards adjudicatory leadership. Some early amendments led no doubt to a superior understanding of Indian constitutionalism; thus the very First Amendment expands the <u>Part III</u> equality rights as empowering the State to pursue percentile quota-based reservations (affirmative action policies) for the millennially disadvantaged Indian citizenry, especially in terms of admission to State-aided educational institutions and government employment. Thus, in turn, arises a new sphere for adjudicative leadership in pursuit of the tasks of 'complex equality' or 'competing equalities'. Parenthetically, all I may say here is the following: (a) the Court legitimates demands of social justice (group-differentiated equality), yet remains anxious about horizontal equality of all eligible citizens; (b) it overall limits the scope of differential treatment as not exceeding 50 per cent of the Indian population; (c) it thus seeks to exclude 'creamy layers' (the already constitutional haves from capturing distributive monopolies to the disadvantage of the actually worst-off citizen-peoples, both in terms of 'equality of opportunity' and 'equality of outcomes'. Hermeneutic leadership of the Court offers a complex realm, in some notable ways different from US jurisprudence—a theme that there is not room to pursue in this chapter.

Unlike its US counterpart, the Indian First Amendment, far from enshrining the ontological robustness of the right to freedom of speech and expression, marks an era of 'reasonable restrictions' enacted on various grounds, including even the 'friendly relations with foreign states'. Judicial acquiescence with these also marks various interpretive styles that question the 'reasonableness' of the power to prescribe 'restrictions' on fundamental rights. Summarily put, it evolves various standards of strict constitutional scrutiny to 'balance' competing constitutional policy considerations that may otherwise entirely 'trump'  $Part III$  rights.</u>

In the low-intensity constitutional warfare over Article 31 private property rights, only a few Justices took an ideological hard line on the notion of private property as the very foundation of freedom and human rights; rather, as K Subba Rao J insisted, the issue was 'Statism', which may govern India as if rights did not matter.<sup>32</sup> More consistently here emerges a form of constitutional legalism underscored with the conviction that the Justices should have the final say in interpreting the Bill of Rights.

The collision over Article 31 property rights occurs variously. Briefly, Parliament amends the Constitution by deleting the word 'just' from the phrase 'just compensation' hoping that the Court may not be able to further insist on market value plus solarium. In response, the Court maintains that the word 'compensation' may only signify 'just compensation'. A further amendment replaces the term 'compensation' altogether by simply saying 'any amount' as 'determined' by an appropriate legislation. The Court strikes back by saying that the word 'determination' carries with it the constitutional burden of principled compensation for takings!

Was the Court far wrong in suggesting that basic constitutional rights may not be taken away or abrogated under the title of distributive justice? If this puts the matter too widely, was it too far wrong in insisting that the State may not acquire castles for a bag of cashews, or palaces for a handful of peanuts? In a wise move, the Court did indeed relax its insistence market value compensation by accepting instead that systematic under-compensation for takings must at least be based on some showing of principled determination.  $33$  Moreover, the Court acquiesced for a long time with the ouster of its jurisdiction by the Ninth Schedule: and furthermore the Fourth Amendment (1955) yields
to the Court's leadership via the principle of market value compensation for the State taking of land 'under personal cultivation'. Did all this achieve or accelerate any serious-minded pursuit of agrarian reforms? Empirical studies of the political economy of the reforms suggest otherwise.<sup>34</sup> All this lays the groundwork for shaping a subsequent epic struggle over the scope and legitimacy of constitutional amendments.

In moving the First Amendment, Nehru was quick to say that constitutional legalism was an act of theft of the Constitution and to justify the Ninth Schedule—listing agrarian reform laws from judicial papers—even when manifestly violative of **Part III** rights—as a way of preventing this 'magnificent edifice' from being 'purloined' by lawyers and judges. Hidayatullah J (among India's most gifted Justices) said memorably that 'ours is the only constitution that needs protection against itself!' This Schedule was used in the Emergency days (1975–76) to protect other laws, including dragnet security legislation, from judicial paper. Incidentally, it was as late as 2009 in *IR Coelho v State of Tamil* Nadu that the Court assumed the power to invalidate the entries in the Schedule.<sup>35</sup>

Indira Nehru Gandhi, the third Prime Minster of India, ascended to high political power, marking India's major experimentation with State finance capitalism—in effect nationalising banks and insurance service industries. The constitutional rationale was articulated under her leadership via the Twenty-fourth and Twenty-fifth Amendments. The latter in 1971 introduced Article 31C—a provision that sheltered fulfilment of Part IV rights if the takings law stood accompanied by a statement that it furthered the pursuit of these rights. The Court may not ever question the law 'on the ground that it *does not give effect to such policy*<sup>'</sup>. <sup>36</sup> The *Kesavananda* Court invalidates this amendment on the ground that it may shield 'colourable' exercise of such a power.

This summary narrative at least suggests entailments of some Foucauldian labours as yet not in sight, whether in qualitative (doctrinal) or quantitative (institutional) Indian or expatriate studies of constitutional jurisprudence. The latter genre does not always do greater service to constitutional legalism, Indian style.<sup>37</sup> There is a constitutional necessity prescribing that a constitutional 'amendment' may only proceed via a law made by Parliament, rather than by referenda or the convening of a new Constituent Assembly. As legislation, it may remain subject to the constitutional power of the Court; the 'heroic' Twenty-fourth Amendment contests this perspective by insisting that constitutional amendments articulate 'constituent power'; put differently, the expressions of legislative will, not amenable at all to acts of HAL. In *Kesavananda*, the Indian State even argued that the amendatory power may thus constitute an economy of excess in which it may reconstitute the constitutional idea of India from a 'republic' into a 'monarchy'; a federal to a 'unitary' form of governance; and a 'secular' form to a 'theocratic' one. The Court returns this 'compliment' by insisting upon an order of basic structure limitations on the amendatory power and in turn presenting itself as a co-equal regime of adjudicatory constituent power.<sup>38</sup>

In any event, *Kesavananda* inaugurates a new Constitution of India, if only because it now marshals a new political consensus that the Court may act as a co-equal branch of the State. I do not quite know how far, and if at all, the Indian ways of plebiscitary competitive party politics may have evolved differently outside of Indian adjudicatory leadership, with and since *Kesavananda*. Going far beyond some staple studies of 'juristocracy' (led eminently by Ran Hirschl), the question is whether this daring articulation of the Basic Structure doctrine merely marks an affair of judicial Will to Power or much better serves a profound difference for the future of Indian constitutionalism and of human rights. Whatever the response, demosprudence has already arrived in the battle for judicial final say on all constitutional matters.

## **VI. THE RIGHTS REVOLUTION: THE SAL DEMOSPRUDENCE**

Indira Nehru Gandhi—whose rise to supreme power was marked by India's triumph in the creation of Bangladesh and her socialist agendum that ushered in an era of State finance capitalism—also ushered in (via the nationalisation of banking and insurance industries) the only explicit act of constitutional authoritarianism in the internal emergency. The trigger for this was provided by the Allahabad High Court decision to 'unseat' her as a Member of Parliament for finding her 'guilty' of 'corruption'.<sup>39</sup> Her response was a Thirty-Ninth Constitutional Amendment that rendered this decision as void and all pending appeals against it as fully infructuous. At the height of constitutional dictatorship, the Court in *Indira Nehru Gandhi v Raj Narain* invalidated this amendment; <sup>40</sup> yet in the infamous *Additional District Magistrate, Jabalpur v Shivakant Shukla* (and world-celebrated dissent by HR Khanna J) four leading Justices of the Court proceeded to uphold a complete and total denial of the venerated right to *habeas corpus*, even against arrests based on mistaken identity. 41

This low point of hermeneutic leadership was soon to be reversed in the early post-Emergency period (1997–80). Thus began the long itinerary of a normative judicial restoration, even a revolution, by way of cathartic and populist acts of revival of an autonomous apex court. This short period marks an extraordinary articulation of adjudicative leadership. Above all, via *Maneka Gandhi v Union of India*, $\frac{42}{5}$  the Court amended Article 21 right to life and liberty as assurances of substantive due process specifically excluded by the Constitution's authors. Since the late 1980s, a different but related rights revolution has unfolded, that I insist on calling the juridical invention of SALas against PIL(public interest litigation) with a view to highlighting its distinctive Indian origins and characteristics.

In and via SAL, the Court has democratised access to constitutional remedies as a basic human right. SAL began as an epistolary jurisdiction (where rightless people or their next of kin, the human rights and social activists, write letters to the Court, which are regarded as writ petitions) and may appear before the Court as petitioners-in-person. Since the Court is itself not a fact-finding authority, it has devised the method of 'socio-legal inquiry commissions' to establish facts and make recommendations, on which it proceeds to issue interim orders and directions (a kind of continuing mandamus). It has further developed a new partnership of learned professions with social and human rights movements and investigative print and electronic journalism.

Overall, all this has inaugurated a new form of constitutional litigation but also developed judicial powers of superintendence over governance institutions and constrained them for the most part to observe their statutory obligations and respect towards constitutional/human rights, thus also expanding judicial power and prowess over national policy agenda.  $\frac{43}{5}$ 

In so doing the Court has shifted the bases of legitimation of adjudicative power by invoking a notion that high judicial power is not just merely an affair of 'governance' comity among the leading State-formative apparatuses, but rather has insisted that all forms of public power should be read as constituting a code of 'public trust'. In turn, this fiduciary notion of judicial power has deeply questioned the notion that elected public officials may justify their everyday acts of power and policymaking on the grounds of electoral mandate; rather, these remain liable to adjudicative deliberation. Some major decisions of the Court have directly appealed to the people of India from whose acquiescence the Court itself derives some extraordinary quotient of judicial power—forms of 'judicial populism<sup>' $44$ </sup> question some core notions of representative democratic governance, without entirely devaluing these. In the process, all this has not merely enhanced the role of the Indian State

High Courts, but also the relative autonomy of constitutional agencies such as the Election Commission of India and associated human rights institutional networks.

In the spheres of normative leadership, the Court devised ways of monitoring and disciplining the runaway exercises of constitution-amending powers, initially solely entrusted to Parliament and the executive, via the invention of the doctrine of the basic structure and essential features of the Constitution. Soon enough the original limits of this doctrine confining the Court's jurisdiction only to constitutional amendments proliferated as a canon of constitutional construction, thus further disciplining the sway of executive and legislative powers. No longer, then, do the conventional theoretical/ideological narratives of 'separation of powers' confine the performance of the Court.

Thus, in a few decisions, the Court has engaged in explicit legislation; for example, it has laid down a fully fledged judicial legislation concerning sexual harassment in the workplace, and the unconscionable practices of campus violence ('ragging'). These explicitly detailed judicial legislative acts are nominally subject to any eventual national legislation, whose conformity with such acts also remains a matter for judicial power. Further the creeping jurisdiction of the Court is now directed to some acts of national policymaking, such as the protection of the environmental commons; national rivers water-sharing arrangements; disaster management; rehabilitation and recompense for those Indian citizens affected by developmental projects.

There is further evidence of this daring adjudicatory leadership: the Court has not merely restored rights deliberately excluded by the Constituent Assembly of India (such as the right to a speedy trial, bail, and adequate legal representation), but more crucially has created a right to substantive 'due process'; in this way, it has further read into the right to life and liberty (Article 21) an unending regime of enunciation of human rights to livelihood, shelter and housing, food and nutrition, education, health, and environmental well-being; in sum, for the past twenty five years the Court has been steadily converting human *needs* into human *rights*. In the process, it has also mutated the discourse of judicially unenforceable (as originally enacted) Directive Principles, mostly by incorporating these into Article 21 as now interpreted (importing substantive due process).

In the area of affirmative action for socially disadvantaged groups, the Court has insisted that the identification of beneficiaries be based on scientific studies—the overall quota (mostly for educational and State employment) should not exceed 50 per cent—and provided for the exclusion of creamy layers among the disadvantaged peoples. More recently, in a further pursuit of SAL power and process, the Court has welcomed mass media sting exposés to render corruption in high public places as a violation of constitutional morality, human rights, and the fiduciary obligations of decent democratic administration.

## **VII. SOCIALLY RESPONSIBLE CRITICISM**

These complex patterns of adjudicatory leadership have not gone unchallenged both within and outside the Court. Almost at every step of this development, dissident Justices have contested the emergence of judicial supremacy in the governance of the nation and the partially concurrent Justices have issued stern cautions on what is thought to be extravagant assertion of judicial power. Yet, over time, and with some residue of internal dissension, most such judicial actors have shed their initial ambivalence—an unsurprising phenomenon given the judicial Will to Power.

Some leading lawyers, and academics, who admirably condense the Court's decisional law into

treatises on constitutional law, have persistently questioned the expanding realms of adjudicative leadership. Many leading law and political theory scholars continue to address the 'anti-majoritarian' aspect of judicial power. $\frac{45}{1}$  On the other hand, activist academics, while critical of this or that decisional trend, overall embrace the fiduciary notion of the judicial role, as do specific agendadriven human rights and social action movements. For the 24/7 hyper-globalising news and views mass media and the related commentariat (that now functionally displaces the proletariat) ad hoc criticism of Indian judicial action remains a lucrative business. Overall, the problem of judging the judges emerges in the public, rather populist, deliberative sphere, as always inviting the question of *socially responsible forms of criticism*.

The bases of SRC are often unarticulated. Nor is any distinction made between *episodic* and *structural* criticism, even critique. I do not insist on the binary; who can in these halcyon days of postmodernism? But I do suggest that the ways in which we deconstruct these do matter. If structural change is a long-term affair, for example, we may not criticise the courts for not changing the structures of power or domination by a single line of decisions; indeed, then the question is not so much what judicial power does (or does not do) but it is the ways in which the courts are mobilised by insurgent actors and the ways in which the outcomes are incrementally used. Talking about outcomes is also to take seriously the problem of 'symbolic' and 'instrumental' outcomes and impact studies.<sup>46</sup> What 'structural' critique may learn from the 'episodic'—the triumphal narratives of the successful and the disappointments of the losing party—is also as yet an open question.

In a form of adjudication governed by the principle of parliamentary 'sovereignty' the basic structure doctrine seems out of place. The winner-takes-it-all principle postulates that the judicial innovation of SAL 'hope-and-trust' jurisdiction (notably by Justice PN Bhagwati) is misplaced. Judges as directing executive policy or as shaping a legislative one are seen to trespass upon 'separation of powers'. Administrative law developments are often criticised on this ground. Some adjudge the rising judicial sovereignty as undemocratic in principle, as it lowers the bar of representative intuitions. The wider point, of course, is that adjudicative leadership should not ignore State differentiation; the Court is best seen as working through such institutions, rather than singularly or alone.

Even when meriting further discussion, the suggestion that scholarly critics of courts state their own ideology in broad daylight and articulate the general principles animating their critique seems a legitimate one. SRC is a spieces, if you like, of *careful* criticism of judicial performance and the ways in which judges, lawyers, and jurists think.

The varied response of Parliament/executive to adjudicatory leadership has moved from initial outcries of judicial usurpation to grudging accommodation. This is partly due to the fact that, ever since its inception, leading political actors have gone to the Court for judicial and constitutional protection of their basic rights against their incumbent adversaries. Even a bare glance at the parties in the leading decisions of the Court reads like a 'who's who' of Indian politics. No matter how Justices may proceed to decide constitutional contentions, the outcome becomes a politically appropriable resource. *Bush v Gore* may provide a rare moment of adjudicative politics in the United States Supreme Court; $\frac{47}{1}$  in contrast, the Indian Supreme Court would be simply unimaginable this way! Do the questions then confronting the Indian Supreme Court provide a different context, marking the distinction between judicial role and function in developing constitutional democracies and some bicentennial forms of constitutional adjudication? This in turn frames the contestation between a historical (and therefore abstractly universalising) view of what may be said after all to be the province and function of apex courts and the historically new formations of post-colonial (and now,

## **VIII. TOWARDS A CONCLUSION: DEMOSPRUDENCE?**

How the Court shapes and reshapes the demos is an all-important question. Perhaps, the earlier Justices, during 1950–73, did not regard themselves as social entrepreneurs and constitutional activists, preoccupied as they were with laying the foundations of judicial review, a model of rule of law, and of adjudication, and guided the colonial lawyering into a constitutional profession. In so doing they were not unmindful of the wider question of social legitimation of the Constitution; however, the early Indian Justices thought and acted primarily as *legalists* rather than as *legatees* of constitutional democracy. The scene and scenario since 1973 is very different: in the main it has been an era of substantive due process.

The distinctive political role carries with it the loss of constitutional legal certainty. For example, this is shown dramatically in the decisions in *Lily Thomas v Union of India <sup>48</sup>* and *Suresh Kumar Koushal v Naz Foundation*: <sup>49</sup> *Lily Thomas* cancelled a 60-year-plus tradition of doing politics in India by reversing the settled principle of innocent until proven guilty, and *Koushal* denied substantive due process to sexual minorities by the failure to reverse a legislative precedent of even longer standing.<sup>50</sup> On the side of organisational leadership, the Court's own ambivalence in sexual harassment situations by retired judges has given the impression that even then substantive due process is hard and male in nature!

That a substantive due process court may err and be inconstant is scarcely a novel finding. That such a court may fail the fundamental human rights of sexual minorities, be unmindful of the constitutional presumption of innocence, set limits to right to information about the judiciary, and tolerate sexual harassment by judges is a matter of deep concern. Yet any verdict on demosprudence is premature; is it true to say that in the absence of collective judicial self-discipline and in the full absence of a degree of judicial consistency, substantive due process may amount neither to jurisprudence nor to demosprudence?

- $\frac{4}{3}$  Guinier, 'Foreword' [\(n](#page-11-0) 2) 14.
- <sup>5</sup> Guinier, 'Foreword' [\(n](#page-11-0) 2) 15. See also Guinier, 'Changing the Wind' (n 2).
- $\frac{6}{2}$  Guinier, 'Foreword' [\(n](#page-11-0) 2) 16.
- <sup>2</sup> Guinier, 'Foreword'  $(\underline{n} 2)$  15–16.

<sup>\*</sup> Aspects of this theme also been developed in the Professor AR Blackshield Lecture and LM Sinhgvi Memorial Lecture, delivered on 21 October 2014 and 17 November 2014, respectively.

<sup>&</sup>lt;sup>1</sup> First offered in Upendra Baxi, 'Public and Insurgent Reason: Adjudicatory Leadership in a Hyper-Globalizing World' in Stephen Gill (ed) *Global Crises and the Crisis of Global Leadership* (Cambridge University Press 2011) 167–79.

<span id="page-11-0"></span> $2$  Lani Guinier, 'Foreword: Demosprudence through Dissents' (2008) 122(4) Harvard Law Review 6; Lani Guinier, 'Courting the People: Demosprudence and Law/Politics Divide' (2009) 89 Boston University Law Review 539; Lani Guinier and Gerald Torres, 'Changing the Wind: Notes Toward a Demosprudence of Law and Social Movements' (2014) 123 Yale Law Journal 2740.

 $\frac{3}{2}$  Guinier, 'Foreword' [\(n](#page-11-0) 2) 14.

<sup>&</sup>lt;sup>8</sup> Gerald Rosenburg, 'Romancing the Court' (2009) 89 Boston University Law Review 563; Linda C McClain, 'Supreme Court Justices—Empathy and Social Change: A Comment on Lani Guinier's *Demosprudence Through Dissent*' (2009) 89 Boston University Law Review 589. But see Robert Post, 'Law Professors and Political Scientists: Observations on the Law/Politics Distinction in the Guinier/Rosenberg Debate' (2009) 89 Boston University Law Review 581.

 $9$  See the remarkable analyses of the South African Constitutional Court in Brian Ray, 'Demosprudence in Comparative Perspective' (2010) 47 Stanford Journal of International Law 111.

 $\frac{10}{2}$  Christian List and Mathias Koenig-Archibugi, 'Can There Be a Global Demos? An Agency-Based Approach' (2010) 38(1) Philosophy and Public Affairs 76.

 $\frac{11}{2}$  Thus, the Court stands endowed with wide-ranging powers to protect and enforce fundamental rights parcelled out as judicially enforceable civil and political rights (Part III). Non-justiciable social and economic rights described as the Directive Principles of State Policy (Part IV) are constituted as paramount obligations of the State in the making of laws and public policies. Further, the Part III rights remain subject to various forms of plenary powers of Parliament to impose 'reasonable restrictions' based on specific grounds stated therein. Following the advice of Justice Felix Frankfurter, and the realities of the partition of British India, art 21, right to life and personal liberty, was made subject to 'procedure established by law', exempted from adjudicative scrutiny under any approach to substantive due process. Thus, art 22 enacted expansive powers of preventive/pre-trial detention, understandable in the moment of origin, which still rendered the states of exception as a constitutional norm. Art 356 authorising the Union executive (by a Presidential order) to suspend or dissolve State legislatures and the extensive (though now much amended) art 352 powers to proclaim states of emergency on the grounds of 'external aggression' and 'internal disturbance' exemplify the centralising trend.

 $\frac{12}{5}$  See George H Gadbois, Jr, *Judges of the Supreme Court of India: 1950–1989* (Oxford University Press 2011); Abhinav Chandrachud, *The Informal Constitution: Unwritten Criteria in Selecting Judges for the Supreme Court of India* (Oxford University Press 2014); Nick Robinson, 'Judicial Architecture and Capacity' (chapter 19, this volume).

 $\frac{13}{2}$  Madhav Khosla, 'Addressing Judicial Activism in the Indian Supreme Court: Towards an Evolved Debate' (2009) 32 Hastings International and Comparative Law Review 55; Madhav Khosla, *The Indian Constitution* (Oxford University Press 2012).

<sup>14</sup> Upendra Baxi, 'The Travails of Stare Decisis in India' in AR Blackshield (ed) *Legal Change: Essays in Honour of Professor Julius Stone* (Butterworths 1984) 34; A Laksminath, *Judicial Process: Precedent in Indian Law* (Eastern Book Company 2009).

<sup>15</sup> Zoya Hasan, E Sridharan, and R Sudershan (eds), *India's Living Constitution: Ideas, Practices, Controversies* (Anthem Press 2005); Granville Austin, *The Indian Constitution: Cornerstone of a Nation* (Oxford University Press 1966); Granville Austin, *Working a Democratic Constitution* (Oxford University Press 2000).

<sup>16</sup> *Supreme Court Advocates-on Record Association v Union of India* 1993 (4) SCC 441.

<sup>17</sup> *Special Reference No 1 of 1998* 1998 (7) SCC 739.

<sup>18</sup> *Subhash Sharma* v *Union of India* (1991) Supp (1) SCC 574 [29] (emphasis added).

<sup>19</sup> For example, the early Court (1950–69) *legislates* an entire corpus of constraints via judicial power of administrative action and executive power of rule making under 'delegated legislation, birthing some spectacular post-colonial developments in administrative law/jurisprudence; *develops* standards of strict constitutional scrutiny over the powers of preventive detention constitutionally authorized by Article 22; *enhances* judicial power concerning Parliamentary powers to impose "reasonable restrictions" on Part III enshrined fundamental (civil and political) rights; *articulates* principles governing the Constitution's federal distribution of legislative powers between the States and the federal government; *stipulates* what is, and is not, a reasonable restriction' on fundamental rights.

<sup>20</sup> *Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record-Association v Union of India 2015 SCC OnLine SC 964.*

 $\frac{21}{21}$  Upendra Baxi, 'Valedictory Speech, The Way Ahead', High Level Committee on Gender Justice, 15 December 2013 (mimeo).

<sup>22</sup> See Allison Kesby, *The Right to Have Rights: Citizenship, Humanity, and International Law* (Oxford University Press 2012); Peg Birmingham, *Hannah Arendt and Human Rights: The Predicament of Common Responsibility* (Indiana University Press 2006).

<sup>23</sup> Ujjwal Singh, *The State, Democracy and Anti-Terror Laws in India* (Sage Publications 2007); Shaylashri Sankar, *Scaling Justice: India's Supreme Court, Social Rights, and Civil Liberties* (Oxford University Press 2009).

<sup>24</sup> Upendra Baxi, 'Introduction' in KK Mathew *Democracy, Equality, and Freedom* (Eastern Book Company 1973).

 $\frac{25}{2}$  (1985) 3 SCC 545.

<sup>26</sup> *Sajjan Singh v State of Rajasthan* AIR 1965 SC 845.

<sup>27</sup> *Golak Nath v State of Punjab* AIR 1967 SC 1643.

<sup>28</sup> *Kesavananda Bharati v State of Kerala* (1973) 4 SCC 225.

<sup>29</sup> See Upendra Baxi, 'Constitutional Interpretation and State Formative Practices in Pakistan' in MP Singh (ed) *Comparative Constitutional Law: Festschrift in Honor of Professor PK Tripathi* (Eastern Book Company 2011) 201–46; Upendra Baxi, 'Modelling "Optimal" Constitutional Design for Government Structure: Some Debutante Remarks' in Sunil Khilnani, Vikram Raghavan, and Arun K Thiruvengadam (eds) *Comparative Constitutionalism in South Asia* (Oxford University Press 2013) 23–44; SP Sathe, *Judicial Activism in India: Transgressing Borders and Enforcing Borders* (Oxford University Press 2003). See generally, Sudhir Krishnaswamy, *Democracy and Constitutionalism in India: A Study of the Basic Structure Doctrin*e (Oxford University Press 2009); Rajeev Dhavan, *The Supreme Court of India and Parliamentary Sovereignty* (Sterling Publishers 1976).

<span id="page-12-0"></span> $\frac{30}{2}$  (1994) 3 SCC 1.

<sup>31</sup> *SR Bommai* (n [30\)](#page-12-0).

<sup>32</sup> TV Subba Rao, *Constitutional Development in India: Contribution of Justice K. Subba Rao* (Deep and Deep 1992).

<sup>33</sup> See Upendra Baxi, '*State of Gujarat v Shantilal*: A Requiem for Just Compensation?' (1969) 9 Jaipur Law Journal 28.

<sup>34</sup> See Upendra Baxi, ' "The Little Done, The Vast Undone": Some Reflections on Reading Granville Austin's *The Indian Constitution*' (1967) 9 Journal of the Indian Law Institute 323.

35 *IR Coelho v State of Tamil Nadu* AIR 2007 SC 861; Kamala Sankaran, 'From Brooding Omnipresence to Concrete Textual Provisions: IR Coelho Judgment and Basic Structure Doctrine' (2007) 49 Journal of the Indian Law Institute 240; Pathik Gandhi, 'Basic Structure and Ordinary Laws: Analysis of the Election Case & the Coelho Case' (2010) 4 Indian Journal of Constitutional Law 47.

 $\frac{36}{10}$  Constitution of India 1950, art 31C (emphasis added).

<sup>37</sup> Quantitative analyses largely study *outcomes*, rarely *trends*; very helpful in predicting individual judicial conduct, they do not tell us much about the Court as whole; these do not take account of what Justices *think* and what the law *ought* to be. Qualitative studies have their own limitations; but for that reason alone are not useless, as often alleged.

 $38$  Put starkly, this means that the Court remains the final arbiter of constitutional amendments—put in Kelsenite terms as a singular juristic community that may presuppose the Grundnorm as a postulate of governance by and large efficacious: see J Bernstorff, *The Public International Law Theory of Hans Kelsen* (Cambridge University Press 2010), who presents Hans Kelsen as an *iusnaturalist* thinker.

<sup>39</sup> See, for background information, Prashant Bhushan, *The Case that Shook India* (Vikas Publishing 1978).

 $\frac{40}{1975}$  Supp SCC 1.

 $\frac{41}{1}$  (1976) 2 SCC 521.

 $\frac{42}{1}$  (1978) 1 SCC 248.

<sup>43</sup> See Sandra Freedman, *Human Rights Transformed: Positive Rights and Positive Duties* (Oxford University Press 2008).

<sup>44</sup> Upendra Baxi, *The Indian Supreme Court and Politics* (Eastern Book Company 1980).

 $\frac{45}{2}$  Notably, Pratap Bhanu Mehta; see his 'Passion and Constraint: Courts and the Regulation of Religious Meaning' in Rajeev Bhargava (ed) *Politics and Ethics of the Indian Constitution* (Oxford University Press 2008) 311; 'The Rise of Judicial Sovereignty' (2007) 18 Journal of Democracy 70; 'The Inner Conflict in India's Constitution' in Hasan et al  $(n\ 14)$  179.

<span id="page-13-0"></span><sup>46</sup> See *Lily Thomas v Union of India* (2013) 7 SCC 653; *Suresh Kumar Koushal v Naz Foundation* (2014) 1 SCC 1. See also Upendra Baxi, 'Naz 2: A Critique' (2014) 49(6) Economic and Political Weekly 12. See as to impact studies, Upendra Baxi, 'Who Bothers about the Supreme Court: The Impact of Supreme Court Decisions' (1982) 24 Journal of the Indian Law Institute 848.

 $\frac{47}{2}$  531 US 98 (2000).

<sup>48</sup> *Lily Thomas* (n [46\)](#page-13-0).

<sup>49</sup> *Suresh Kumar Koushal* (n [46](#page-13-0)).

<sup>50</sup> Upendra Baxi, 'Modelling "Optimal" Constitutional Design for Government Structure: Some Debutante Remarks' in Sunil Khilnani, Vikram Raghavan, and Arun K Thiruvengadam (eds) *Comparative Constitutionalism in South Asia* (Oxford University Press 2013) 23–44.