# 8 The blindness of insight Why communalism in India is about caste1 Dilip M. Menon

[A] large part of our intellectual discourse has in fact been an autobiography of the secular (read: upper-caste) self, its origin, its conflict with tradition, its desire to be modern. The intimate … connection between the biography of the nation-state and the autobiography of the secular self structures, in ways that we have barely begun to understand, our relationship to caste (Dhareshwar 1992).

Caste is the central fault line of modern India, yet Indian social science has a tendency to study it as a displacement of what are seen as more fundamental identities such as class or ethnicity. This is despite the fact that the public spaces of modern India are inflected by violence against lower castes and its domestic spaces structured by strict prohibitions against caste miscegenation. Post-colonial scholarship has written the history of our modernity in terms of a deeply desirable transition to a notion of the Indian citizen unmarked by affinities other than to a national identity. This has had the effect of obscuring fundamental inequities that make some Indians more equal than others. And among the threats to the emergence of a modern India, 'communalism' or the political organization of religious community has come to be seen as the central agent of violence in India. Hindu-Muslim violence has become emblematic of the question of an as yet unresolved modernity in India. The construction of a secular citizen is the exigent national project.

There has been a reluctance to engage with what is arguably an intimate relation between the discourses of caste, secularism and communalism (see Varshney 2002 for a typical example of such blindness). That Hinduism, as religion, social system or way of life is a hierarchical, inegalitarian structure is largely accepted, but unacknowledged in academic discourse is both the casual brutality as well as the organized violence that it practices towards its subordinate sections. What we need to explore is the inner violence within Hinduism as much as the violence directed outwards against Muslims and acknowledge that the former is historically prior. The question needs to be: how has the employment of violence against an internal Other (defined in terms of inherent inequality) i.e. the Dalit, been displaced as one of aggression against an external Other (defined in terms of inherent difference) i.e. the Muslim. Is communalism a deflection of the central issue of violence and inegalitarianism within the Hindu religion? This is the point of departure for this chapter.

In this historical conversion of an earlier, involuted violence, how do we explain the persistent, nagging, fact of the involvement of Dalit and tribal groups in the killings of Muslims whether in the late nineteenth century, the Partition riots of 1947–48, or in Gujarat in 2002? How have lower castes come to be suborned as the 'foot soldiers' of a militant Hindu identity for over a century? This requires us to offer a more historically textured and nuanced explanation than the mere fact of the operations of the brute power of upper castes in coercing participation, or the somewhat condescending assumption that material inducements are the major factor in ensuring participation. What might be the subjective reasons on the part of Dalits who participate in violence against those Muslims, very often sharing the same spaces as they do, and often engaged in similar occupations?<sup>2</sup>

Dhareshwar poses the puzzle of 'the solipsism of the secular self with regard to caste' (1992: 115). He argues that the desire of the Indian post-colonial elite to be modern has worked within the progressive narrative of liberal humanism. Self-fashioning is seen as the result of a jettisoning of ethnic, linguistic, caste and other markers to attain the abstract identity of the individual-citizen. To this end, the post-colonial elite in India have used English, both as language as much as a 'semiotic system symbolizing modernity', to impose their secular categories on the social world. This modern subjectivity, framed in English, has allowed caste to be approached only at one remove, as something restricted to the private domain suffused with the vernacular. English has acted as a 'meta-language' with reference to caste and other 'traditional' practices and those who appropriate English claim a subject position which is free from caste and religious markings. The public sphere is narrowly constructed as the sphere governed by secular categories. Witness for example, the censoring of the word 'Muslim' in the national English press and the use of the persistent, pernicious euphemism: 'the minority community' (of a piece with the official description of the demolished mosque, the Babri Masjid, as the 'disputed structure'). As also the seemingly trivial, but semiotically significant fact that signs enjoining public hygiene in Indian cities are nearly always in English, which are observed more in the breach by the 'not-yet-modern' occupiers of public space (Chakrabarty 1991; Kaviraj 1996). What follows from this is the claim by the upper caste secular self that s/he does not practice caste, using as s/he does impeccably unmarked categories in public discourse, while Dalits and others are casteist since they deploy the language of caste in the public sphere. As Dhareshwar points out, there is often a 'certain slippage that equates caste exclusively with lower-caste and that this slippage is systematic rather than accidental' (1992: 121, 118–20). This also leads us to the question so poignantly posed by the political scientist Gopal Guru, 'Can the Dalit articulate a universal position?'

This occlusion of caste in the public sphere is paralleled by the recognition of the need to eliminate public expressions of religion as part of the requirement of secularism, though this remains a vexed question. So here again, we are faced with the piquant situation that while periodic violence against Muslims invites outrage in the national press by public intellectuals, the quotidian violence against lower castes goes largely unremarked upon and occupies the space of unremarkable journalistic reportage.3 Of course, sociologists and anthropologists study caste in villages, but where caste is not seen as an element of an irreducible Indian essence, it is represented as part of a transactional system where statuses are contextual, contingent and negotiated. The fact that being a Dalit may represent the zero-degree of subalternity is masked by appeals to historical change as much as the idea of performativity of self. That Dalit performance of self operates within a severely circumscribed range as also the fact that it runs the risk of attracting a disciplining violence needs to be remembered. When the question of violence does surface it is generally rendered as the preserve of the state (epistemic, developmental and national security) and as arising from the imperatives of governmentality. Little if any attention is paid to the bloodshed arising from the everyday preservation of hierarchy. Gyanendra Pandey points to the normalization of governmentality through a rendering of the very idea of violence as 'exceptional'. More pertinent for our argument is his astute observation that, 'It is the denial of violence "in our midst", the attribution of harmony within and the consignment of violence to the outside that establishes community' (Pandey 2001: 188; cf. Das 1995; Das and Kleinman 2000).

So how do we look at communalism through the problematic of caste and violence that is endemic to Hinduism itself ? To put forward my argument briefly, in the period from 1850–1947, communal violence has always followed periods of lower caste mobility and assertion. As structures of coercion were challenged in the villages, the increasing difficulty of exercising violence against subordinate castes in the face of their self-assertion resulted in a closing of ranks within Hinduism both around symbols of unity such as the cow in the nineteenth century and through a deflection of violence onto Muslims. I would argue that the sequentiality of Mandal (the anti-reservation riots) and Masjid (the anti-Muslim riots) in the early 1990s was part of a longer historical pattern. We need to revisit the history of the colonial period from the conjuncture of the 1990s which was arguably the defining moment of post-Independence India. Thomas Hansen has argued that the rise of the Hindu right can be seen as a 'conservative revolution', against forces both from within (the growing assertiveness of backward and lower castes) as well as from without i.e. the threat of liberalization and the incorporation into a global mass culture. He suggests that post-colonial India had been built on a distinction between proper 'society' (what Dhareshwar would term the English, secular public sphere) and the world of the 'masses' (the realm of the vernacular private) (Hansen 1999). The turmoil of the 1990s threw the separation of these two worlds into crisis and made evident the disarticulation of what had appeared to be a seamless transition to an independent India under the leadership of a hegemonic elite. I shall now turn to two themes: the emergence of a public sphere under colonialism, and the production of a discourse of communalism to argue that the trajectory of politics in north and south India has diverged on the issue of the resolution of caste. This may have been central to the politics of religious violence in colonial north India.

#### The public sphere under colonialism

Eighteenth century north India had seen the emergence of an incipient urban public sphere, premised on collective activities in a public realm and characterized by debates around issues of religion, community and identity. This carried forward traditions of state negotiation with communities through the administrative structures of the Mughals, informal networks of association around pilgrimage centres, performative congregations around the Ramlila, as also formal debates between maulavis and pandits in centres such as Benares and Agra (Bayly 1998, 1996; Hansen 1992; Lutgendorf 1991). Central to this array of thick, social interaction were notions both of conceptualization of urban space enabling 'public' activities to take place as also the notion that some literary and speech forms were more amenable to articulating 'public' concerns of 'general interest' (see Freitag 1991). The decline of Mughal authority meant the slow deterioration of structures of compromise and negotiation within and between communities. The early Company state had been more amenable to negotiation within an existing social and sacral realm to the extent of 'playing nursemaid to Vishnoo' as a later missionary critique put it. However, the entry of Christian missionaries after the passing of the Charter act of 1833 introduced a new element within the discussions animating the public realm. Earlier gentler forms of cultural interchange like the Muslim–Christian dialogues of the munazara tradition were superseded by the framework of a new harsher polemics of Evangelical Christianity that questioned the foundations of both Islam and Hinduism (Powell 1993). This in turn was to generate the heated polemical exchanges in public initiated by the Arya Samaj in the late nineteenth century.

The emerging British structures of governance in the nineteenth century were premised, particularly after the experience of 1857, both on a strict nonintervention in matters construed as 'religious' as also the attempt at creating a denatured public realm freed from the influence of religion. Religion was to be a private, community matter and its public manifestations were transferred to a discourse of law and order. Public religious identity and 'communal' identity became synonymous in the eyes of the state (see Pandey 1990; Freitag 1989). The colonial state neglected to integrate an emergent alternative realm: an arena of what Sandria Freitag terms 'localized, familial and fictive kin-based activities, frequently articulated in terms with religious and kinship resonances' (1991). Inevitably, the political arena of colonialism was a limited, morally empty space. Freitag argues that the colonial state, working on the assumption that distinctions between 'private' and 'public' were easily made, identified itself as the protector for 'general' and 'public' interests, relegating 'private' or 'particular' interests to an increasingly reified notion of community. This was premised on two related assumptions: that the state's institutions could accommodate all 'political' issues and that issues relating to religion, kinship and so on were apolitical. The removal of the state from what it perceived as private issues allowed Indians to 'experiment and contest freely the status and ideological constructs they expressed in public' (Freitag 1996).

Missionary effort, both in education as well as the creation of a vernacular press created a parallel reaction in which Hindu organizations began to 'project a novel version of a public, all-India Hinduism under attack from Western interference' (Bayly 1994). In north India, there were two kinds of response to a muscular articulation of Christianity. The first was the revivalist tendency which attempted to recreate traditional religion in the image of its challenger. Textual exegesis, a return to essentials, and a distancing from popular forms of religion marked both Hindu and Islamic revivalism. The pandits of Calcutta fighting a rearguard action through the revival of a Sanskritic apologetics as much as the Deoband enterprise of Nanautawi and Gangohi in the late nineteenth century seeking to guide Muslims in a new faithless world were bound by the need to streamline religion in the face of the modern (Metcalf 1982, 1992; Young 1981). Aggressive counter attacks whether through debate or through war characterized the second approach. The characterization of colonial India as a dar-ul-harb provided the rationale for such diverse nineteenth century Islamic movements such as Barelwi's attempts to set up an alternate state authority in the north-west and Titu Mir's in the east to mount an armed challenge to colonial rule. The Arya Samaj, founded in the late nineteenth century by Dayananda Saraswati, combined revivalism (a return to the Vedas) with aggressive public debates against Christian and Muslim preachers. The nineteenth century cannot be understood except within the crucible of a three-cornered polemic between Hindu, Christian and Muslim (Jones, 1976, 1989; Jordens 1978).

However, in the heat of conflict, unity, rather than internal difference and inequality, was the main issue. Among the Muslims there was a consolidation of an upper class *ashraf* identity premised on pure, textual practice and a move away from spaces of shared practices with a popular realm. Sir Syed Ahmad Khan's attempt to create a Muslim elite educated in an Oxbridge style environment at Aligarh at the Anglo-Mohammedan Oriental College, was but the most deliberate of such measures (Lelyveld 1975). The emergent public sphere in northern India was upper class and male in character and in the case of the Hindus, upper caste as well. Vasudha Dalmia in her magisterial work on the Hindi poet Bharatendu Harischandra and the emergence of a public sphere in nineteenth century north India shows how the discursive sphere of Hindi literature and periodicals reaffirmed Hinduism and its hierarchical order. In the face of colonial interventions in Hinduism (as in the case of anti-*sati* legislation) as well as Christian polemic, public defences of Hinduism began to lay stress on its timeless character: a sanatana dharma beyond caste, creed and of course, history (Dalmia 1997), Religion was seen as the one factor that bound the Hindus together, for ruling dynasties had come and gone, while Hindu *dharma* went on for ever. Thus, the Christian polemic against the inegalitarianism of Hinduism led to a closing of ranks around a revivified, all-inclusive high Hinduism forgetful of hierarchy. As Francesca Orsini puts it, 'The ideal Indian society, the *varna* system, seemed ... to ward off the mirage of equality, the dangers of class conflict, and the evil of materialism ... to reassert India's claims to superiority'. While there were occasional dissident voices that raised the issue of caste oppression, there were no untouchable interlocutors in the nineteenth century public sphere in north India. In the face of the upper caste reconstitution of Hinduism in its own image, no counter-historiography emerged (Orsini 2002). As we shall see later, the clean lower castes moved towards adoption of a militant Hinduism while untouchables initially adopted a principled distance from being Hindu through the adoption of radical *bhakti* that stressed devotion to their caste *gurus* (see Gooptu 2001).

In south India, Christianity afforded an interface with modernity for lower castes. And it was Christianity that allowed for their entry into a public sphere generated by inter-religious discussions. Unlike north India, the lowest castes were party to the expansion of the sphere of public debate through the missionary led proliferation of print and the appearance of textbooks, journals and magazines (Sam 1988; see Menon 2004). The missionary journals democratized access to a literate sphere of debate and knowledge, and also provided an alternative sphere of reflection on self and society. It was not only at an intellectual level that lower castes entered the new public sphere of debate. In colonial Madras, Paraya converts had been agitating since the early nineteenth century over a whole range of secular concerns, including protests against the delimiting of their neighbourhoods or *paraceris* by colonial authorities, as well as agitating to get their caste headmen appointed as leaders of Christian convert communities (see Balachandran 1999; Raman 1999).

The publication of Bishop Caldwell's study of the Dravidian language in the mid nineteenth century helped popularize the idea that the Brahmins were not indigenous to south India. This was to have further ramifications in the idea that a traditional casteless culture had been stunted by the invasion of Brahmins from the north. Resurgent histories were the norm in south India; whether in the discovery of a glorious age of Tamil civilization, or the reconstruction of an egalitarian Buddhist past in the works of Dalit intellectuals like Iyothee Thass (see Geetha and Rajadurai 1998; Ramaswamy 1997). The question of caste hierarchy was central to these discussions and Hinduism, unlike the north, appeared less as a monolith than a beleaguered behemoth riven by internal hemorrhage. It is not without significance that the major caste reformers of the

nineteenth and twentieth century - Phule, Narayana Guru, EV Ramaswamy Naicker and Ambedkar have been from the south of the Vindhyas. There were other secular reasons for this assertion of equality such as the engagement of lower castes with the cash crop economy (as in the case of the Nadars), the opening up of south east Asia by Natukottai Chettiar capital and the rise of plantations in Ceylon, Malaya and the West Indies raising the possibilities of labour migration (Baker 1984; Hardgrave 1969; Rudner 1994; Menon 1994). The presence of the ocean in general allowed for a larger space of mobility than in the north; particularly the Indo-Gangetic plain where stagnant agrarian hierarchies were the norm till the histories of indentured labour began the engagement with the sea in the nineteenth century.

## The discourse of communalism

The previous section has shown how the histories of north and south India diverged around the issue of the addressing of caste inequality. Following on from this, could it be argued that the discourse of communalism in northern India arose from this refusal to engage frontally with hierarchy? How do we engage with the question of the connection between lower caste upward mobility and the phenomenon of 'communalism'? Schematically, one can look at three flashpoints in the period between 1880 and 1947: the Cow Protection Riots of the 1890s in the United Provinces and Bihar; the period of Non-Cooperation in the 1920s in Bengal; and the Partition Riots in Punjab and Bengal in 1946–47. In each of these instances, an economic upturn generated the possibility of upward mobility for lower castes which in turn created intransigence towards the continuing domination by caste superiors. Beleaguered upper caste elites turned to a rhetoric of common symbols and an open Hinduism while at the same time presenting the menace of a resurgent, competitive Islam. In the violence that followed, the problem of internal differentiation and hierarchy in Hinduism was temporarily resolved through the projection of a united Hindu violence against Muslims.

### Cow protection in the nineteenth century

The Arya Samaj in the late nineteenth century had carried out militant Hindu proselytizing defining a revived upper caste Hinduism. About 1882, they had started the Cow Protection movement in the Punjab which was as much about inventing a common symbol across castes among the Hindus (though it involved a vilification of Chamars who dealt with the skins of dead cattle) as defining a cow-protecting Hinduism against a cow-killing Islam. This movement spread to the United Province and Bihar which were then the site of massive riots in 1893, particularly in the Bhojpuri speaking regions.<sup>4</sup> This region was characterized by a Rajput, Brahmin and Bhumihar landowning elite, largely communities of smallholders, even though there were a few great landlords with estates like the Rajas of Benares, Hathwa or Bettiah. Their economic dominance was buttressed by their numerical strength, except for western Bhojpur where the untouchable Chamars and the lower caste Ahirs outnumbered them. Over the nineteenth century, the operation of market forces, law courts, and the registration of land rights had led to the assertion of status by lower caste groups as also the Koeris and Chamars. The elite landowning groups meanwhile had been hit by the deindustrialization in the Gangetic plain, the commercialization of agriculture (that benefited middle caste groups) and the closing of service opportunities

with the demise of the older political order. A more significant fact was the considerable loss of land through improvidence, debt and the secular operation of market forces.

Lower castes like the Ahirs, Kurmis and Koeris became more assertive through acquiring land; engaging with the Census and its status allocation for castes; and through movements that incorporated ritual procedures like wearing the sacred thread as much as actions with more bite such as the rejection of forced unpaid labour. In this circumstance of a declining elite and a resurgent lower caste group like the Ahirs engaged with the cattle economy, the central issue became the Bakr Id killing of cows by Muslims in 1893.<sup>5</sup> The defence of the cow became the rallying cry to bring together declining elites and militant subalterns among the Hindus against a Muslim community seen narrowly as butchers. The movement for Cow Protection was supported by 'the leading members of the Hindu faith' such as the rajas and once prominent landlords and, in Pandey's words, drew upon 'marginally "clean" castes who aspired to full "cleanness" by emphasizing purity of faith'. As Christophe Jaffrelot emphasizes in his study of lower-caste politics in north India, attempts at upward mobility followed the adoption of 'higher' ritual practices, unlike as in south India, where there was a tendency to 'ethnicize' caste and work towards an internal unity and solidarity accompanied by a rejection of upper caste practices (Jaffrelot 2003). Of course, all was not sheer volition and an aspiration for higher status; the cow protection movement was characterized by forms of social coercion like the boycott of those who sold bullocks to Muslims or refused to participate in the protection of mother cow. Needless to add, contingent alliances between caste elites and subordinate castes did not outlast the riots and in some cases, as in Gorakhpur, lower caste groups like the Chamars and Nats were themselves the targets of attack.

#### Urban strategies of Dalit and shudra groups

In the towns of the United Provinces, lower castes followed two different strategies. In the first instance, untouchable groups turned to bhakti devotionalism – the Adi Hindu movement. As expounded by Swami Achhutanand in the 1920s there were three strategies: the dissociation of untouchables from menial occupations; an assertion that untouchables had been the former rulers of India; and an emphasis on spiritual introspection to understand the irrelevance of social distinctions. The refusal of the Indian National Congress to engage with untouchable leaders, even after the 1920 Nagpur session, meant that they remained within the space of group politics. In Punjab too, Mangoo Ram and the Ad Dharm movement among the untouchables maintained a principled distance from Hinduism as from the Indian National Congress (Juergensmeyer 1982). The second group, the shudra poor, on the other hand, positioned as they were squarely within the orthodox Hindu commercial environment, turned towards an affirmation of Hindu militancy expressed in their involvement in the milieu of the wrestling akharas (gymnasiums) of UP, as Gooptu's work shows. The Hindu Sabha, presided over by Madan Mohan Malaviya and the Arya Samaj worked to bring these militant Shudras under their wing through collective participation in public festivals like the Ram Lila (see Gooptu 2001). The transformation of earlier shared spaces of religion into zones of recruitment for Hindu militancy and spaces of sectarian demarcation was a process that gathered momentum over the 1920s, following the failed concord of the Gandhian Non-Cooperation/Khilafat movement. Fairs, festivals and spaces of popular religion came to be strictly demarcated as either Hindu or Muslim spaces. Moreover, cities became the site of territorial wars of sound, as the leading of processions and playing of music in front of mosques and temples played out another politics. Here again, an urban shudra population of the working poor, tried to work towards larger solidarities in the anomic spaces of the city through an affiliation with militant Hindu organizations (Freitag 1992; Gupta 2001).

## Bengal in the early twentieth century

In Bengal, the late nineteenth century had seen the rise of lower caste movements, particularly with the involvement of lower castes like the Kaibartas and Chandalas in the burgeoning jute economy. From the 1870s, apart from moves towards adopting a different nomenclature (Chandalas becoming Namasudras and Kaibarttas assuming the name of Mahishyas), caste associations had begun to boycott upper castes, denying them forced labour and demanding recognition of status. As Sekhar Bandyopadhaya shows in his magnificent monograph on the Namasudras, these groups remained resolutely alienated from the mainstream of nationalist politics, showing disinterest in the largely Hindu upper caste orientation of the Swadeshi movement (1905–11). Here too, the political activity of the Indian National Congress did little to inspire enthusiasm among either lower castes or Muslims. In the late 1920s, over the issue of music before mosques and consequent rioting, it was becoming clear to many upper caste politicians that lower castes like the Mahishyas would prove useful, even if ultimately dispensable, in pitched battles against Muslims. Wooing them towards Hinduism would kill two birds with one stone. Lower caste groups would be less intractable towards social superiors and they could act as a militant force, albeit of contingent loyalty (see Datta 1999).

Given the demographic structure of undivided Bengal, and the fact that Muslims were in a majority in the eastern districts, the bhadralok had a lot to fear from the colonial opening up of politics to electoral representation. This fear was to be realized in the first provincial elections in 1937 following the provisions of the Government of India Act of 1935, when the Krishak Praja Party came to power with Fazlul Haque becoming the Chief Minister. As Joya Chatterji has controversially and compellingly argued, the Bengal Congress embodied Hindu nationalism and the bhadralok laager mentality in the face of mass politics. Reaching out to the lower rungs of a putative Hindu constituency was left to organizations like the Hindu Sabha which began to be active in the reclaiming of lower castes to Hinduism through shuddhi or purification; infinitely condescending, but a gesture nevertheless. The grand old man of Hindu chauvinism, Savarkar, and the Hindu Mahasabha were active with tribal groups like the Santhals, attempting to get them to stop working for the Muslims (see Bandyopadhaya 1997). In the Santhal Rebellion of 1924–32, there was one chilling moment when Jitu Santhal and his followers made their last stand in the Adina Mosque. They performed a 'debased form of worship' in the mosque instituting an image of Kali (see T. Sarkar 1985). From being the outliers of Hinduism (there was considerable debate at the time as to whether the Santhals and other tribals were 'Hindu' in any meaningful sense) the Santhals had reclaimed a mosque for their putative patrons.

In all these instances, then, is there a simple argument to be made about the manipulation of subalterns by upper caste ideologues? Is it just a simple process of the co-opting of lower caste protest and its subsequent deflection on to an imagined enemy? There are three political conjunctures that are crucial in the emergence of a Hindu bloc before the Partition of India in 1947 and the horrific killings that followed. The first is the Census operations from the late nineteenth century that started off at one level a flurry of petitioning the government for social status and the formation of associations towards this end by castes. Classification had a major consequence in curtailing the right to exit from categories as also in ironing out fuzzy identifications: one was either low or high, either Hindu or Muslim and so on (Barrier 1981; Cohn 1996b; Kaviraj 1992). However, the Census operations also fed into the politics of numbers and representation, with the second conjuncture of the opening of colonial government to Indian participation. An emergent rhetoric of the 'dying Hindu' stemmed from the recognition of the importance of numbers in the colonial imagination (Appadurai 1993). In the carving out of constituencies the paranoid Hindu perception was that Muslims would get a greater share of official spoils because of their numbers. Hinduism was represented as a house divided against itself and hemorrhaging through the conversion of its lower sections to other religions. Drawing in outliers like tribal groups and consecrating them as Hindus could help swell numbers at a time when every head counted. The third crucial conjuncture was the Government of India Act of 1935 that opened up the possibility of an electoral politics, albeit with limited suffrage, and provincial ministries. Now was when the principled stand off from nationalist politics on the part of lower caste groups in Bengal, U.P. and Punjab began breaking down as they realized that the time had come to assimilate or be condemned to the wilderness. As Bandyopadhyaya pithily puts it, post 1935, lower caste groups moved from alienation to integration. One consequence of this was as in the 1946 elections in Bengal when the Congress won 27 of the 30 seats in the Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe constituencies. The other and more horrific integration can be seen in the participation of Namasudras in Hindu militant processions from 1945 and their involvement in the massacre of Muslims at Noakhali in 1946. Lower caste entry into Hinduism was through a baptism in blood at the dawn of Independence.

#### Conclusion

Parallel to the processes of the creation a pan-Hindu identity and the imagination of a unitary Islam in south Asia is the long history of the withdrawal of elites from a space of popular culture and the erosion of spaces of festive, religious and quotidian interaction in themselves. An eighteenth century public sphere of dialogue and negotiation (of which we as yet know very little) had given way to a segregation of the religious from the public sphere by colonial anxieties structured by the trope of 'communalism'. However, we need to look at an attitude towards spaces of popular religion that united a reformist trend from William Jones to the Arya Samaj and Deoband movement through to Gandhi. From the eighteenth century, a process of 'textualization' (to borrow Dirks' pithy phrase) of traditions as well as religion had created a dichotomy in elite perceptions of what constituted an essential Hinduism or Islam (Trautmann 1998). The sphere of abstract, intellectual religious traditions came to be seen as what constituted the fundamentals and the sphere of the everyday, as of pilgrimage and festivals, was perceived as a corrupt set of accretions that marked the devaluation of the abstract ideals in popular practice. This transition was framed by the triangular debate between Christian missionaries and Muslim and Hindu reformers in the public

sphere which increasingly moulded an idea of 'religion' around ideas of 'belief', 'text', 'ritual' and singular identity. Almost as much as the Census, the rhetoric of religious reformers narrowed the parameters of faith and 'religion' became increasingly a stand alone category with its own regulatory mechanisms (Asad 1996; Balagangadhara 1994).

It is the history of the demise of quotidian arenas where differences of class, caste and religion were blurred even if temporarily that we need to chart. And these quotidian spaces were shaped by existential concerns inflected as much by difference as sameness, by violence as much as its forgetting and shared spaces of labour as much as exploitation. When we write about communalism we need to bring to bear these histories and know too that the existential experience of religion has undergone dramatic transformation over the last two centuries. The neatness of categories like Hindu and Muslim hide the porosity of identities as much as histories of the inner violence of hierarchy. It is through the forgetting, and even the violent suppression of inegalitarianism, within putative blocs like Hinduism and Islam that unitary, militant identities are sought to be forged. And in that sense, communalism in India may well be the return of the repressed histories of caste.

# Notes

- 1 This article was originally published in Dilip M. Menon, The Blindness of Insight: Essays on Caste in Modern India (Chennai: Navayana Publications, 2006) and has been abridged by the author.
- 2 I can only raise the question here since as yet we do not have a textured sociological or historical account of relations between Dalits and Muslims in both rural and urban environments. Studies tend to collapse these identities under abstract categories of worker or agricultural labourer, which obscure the formation and assertion of notions of self not encompassed by the relations of production. For instance, see the extensive reporting on the Gujarat riots, and how the Economic and Political Weekly spoke about Dalit-Muslim antagonism solely in terms of declining employment opportunities in cities like Ahmedabad and the competition arising from this. A recent work which does look at Chamar perceptions of Muslims in the context of a village is Gottschalk (2001).
- 3 An important exception is P. Sainath, who has been covering the plight of Dalits all over India in a searing set of articles for the national newspaper The Hindu in 2003.
- 4 The literature on Cow Protection is vast. For a representative range, see McLane (1977) and Freitag (1981). The work of Gyanendra Pandey (1983) is particularly insightful.
- 5 It is interesting that none of the studies of the Cow Protection Movement actually engage with the 'real' cow as opposed to the cow as 'symbol'. By this I mean that we have no idea of the shifts happening in the cattle economy in northern India in the 19th century which may have had an influence on the rhetoric about preventing cow slaughter. I am grateful for conversations with Arvind Das and Shahid Amin on this point.

# References

- Amin, Shahid (2002) 'On retelling the Muslim conquest of northern India', in Partha Chatterjee and Anjan Ghosh (ed.) History and the Present, Delhi: Permanent Black.
- Appadurai, A. (1993) 'Number in the colonial imagination', in Carol Breckenridge and Peter van der Veer (ed.) Orientalism and the Post-colonial Predicament, Delhi: Oxford University Press.
- Asad, Talal (1996) Geneaologies of Religion: Discipline and Reasons of Power in Christianity and Islam, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press.
- Baker, C. J. (1984) An Indian Rural Economy, 1880–1955: The Tamilnad Countryside, Delhi: Oxford University Press.