# **Credit Rating**

The cornerstone of credit risk measurement and management for a financial institution is the credit rating, whether supplied by an external credit rating agency (CRA) or generated by an internal credit model. A credit rating represents an overall assessment of the creditworthiness of a borrower, obligor, or counterparty, and is thus meant to reflect only credit or default risk. That obligor may be either a firm or an individual. In this way the rating is a forecast, and like all forecasts it is noisy. For that reason, credit rating agencies make use of discrete ratings. The convention used by the three largest rating agencies, namely, Fitch, Moody's, and Standard & Poor's (S&P) is to have seven credit grades. They are, from best to worst, AAA, AA, A, BBB, BB, B, and CCC using S&P and Fitch's nomenclature, and Aaa, Aa, A, Baa, Ba, B, and Caa using Moody's nomenclature.b As a firm migrates from a higher to a lower credit rating, that is, it is downgraded, it simply moves closer to default.

The market for credit ratings in the United States is dominated by two players: S&P and Moody's Investor Services; of the smaller rating agencies, only Fitch plays a significant role in the United States (although it has a more substantial presence elsewhere).c The combined market share of Moody's and S&P is 80%, and once market share of Fitch is added, the total exceeds 95% [20].

To be sure, it is not the obligor but the instrument issued by the obligor that receives a credit rating, though an obligor rating typically corresponds to the credit risk of a senior unsecured debenture issued by that firm. The distinction is not that relevant for corporate bonds, where the obligor rating is commensurate with the rating on a senior unsecured instrument, but is quite relevant for structured credit products such as asset-backed securities (ABS). Nonetheless, as stated in a recent S&P document, "[o]ur ratings represent a uniform measure of credit quality globally and across all types of debt instruments. In other words, an 'AAA' rated corporate bond should exhibit the same degree of credit quality as an 'AAA' rated securitized issue." (44, p.4).

This stated intent implies that an investor can assume that, say, a double-A rated instrument is the same in the United States as in Belgium or Singapore, regardless of whether that instrument is a standard corporate bond or a structured product such as a tranche on a collateralized debt obligation (CDO) (*see* **Collateralized Debt Obligations (CDO)**); see also [31]. The actual behavior of rated obligors or instruments may turn out to have more heterogeneity across countries, industries, and product types, and there is substantial supporting evidence. See [37] for evidence of variation across countries of domicile and industries for corporate bond ratings, and [17] for differences between corporate bonds and structured products.

The rating agencies differ about what exactly is assessed. Although Fitch and S&P evaluate an obligor's overall capacity to meet its financial obligation, and hence is best thought of as an estimate of probability of default, Moody's assessment incorporates some judgment of recovery in the event of loss. In the argot of credit risk management, S&P measures PD (probability of default), whereas Moody's measure is somewhat closer to EL (expected loss) [9].d These differences seem to remain for structured products. In describing their ratings criteria and methodology for structured products, S&P states the following: "[w]e base our ratings framework on the likelihood of default rather than expected loss or loss given default. In other words, our ratings at the rated instrument level don't incorporate any analysis or opinion on post-default recovery prospects." (44, p. 3). Since 2005, Fitch, followed soon after by S&P and Moody's, have started publishing recovery ratings (each on a six-point scale). Market sector coverage has been different, but expanding, across the agencies. Also, application is different between corporate *versus* structured products.e

Credit ratings issued by the agencies typically represent an unconditional view, sometimes also called *cycle-neutral* or *through the cycle*: the rating agency's own description of their rating methodology broadly supports this view.

(33, p.6,7): .. [O]ne of Moody's goals is to achieve stable *expected* [italics in original] default rates across rating categories and time. *...* Moody's believes that giving only a modest weight to cyclical conditions best serves the interests of the bulk of investors.f

(43, p.41): Standard & Poor's credit ratings are meant to be forward looking; *...* Accordingly, the anticipated ups and downs of business cycles—whether industry-specific or related to the general economy—should be factored into the credit rating all along. *...* The ideal is to rate 'through the cycle'.

This unconditional or firm-specific view of credit risk stands in contrast to risk measures such as EDFs (expected default frequencies) from Moody's KMV. An EDF has two principal inputs: firm leverage and asset volatility, where the latter is derived from equity (stock price) volatility; see [24] for a description. As a result, EDFs can change frequently and significantly since they reflect the stock market's view of risk for that firm at a given point in time, a view which incorporates both systematic and idiosyncratic risk.

Unfortunately, there is substantial evidence that credit rating changes, including changes to default, exhibit procyclical or systematic variation [7, 27, 37], especially for speculative grades [23].

Although this article's focus is on credit ratings for corporate entities, including special purpose entities such as structured credit, individuals also receive credit ratings or scores. These are important for obtaining either unsecured credit like a credit card, or even a mobile phone, as well as secured credit such as an auto loan or lease or a mortgage. They have received considerable attention of late in the context of subprime mortgages and their securitization. Nonetheless, because the individual credit exposures are typically small, even considering mortgages, banks have tried to automate the credit assessment of retail exposures as much as possible, often with the help of outside firms called *credit bureaus*. See [22] for a discussion with application to credit cards, and [1] for a broader survey on retail credit (*see also* **Credit Scoring** for a review of credit scoring models).

### **How to Generate a Credit Rating**

One of the earliest studies of predicting firm bankruptcy, perhaps the most obvious form of borrower default, is [2]. Altman constructed a balanced sample of 33 defaulted and 33 nondefaulted firms to build a bankruptcy prediction model using multiple-discriminant analysis. His choice of condition variables— ratios reflecting firm leverage and profitability—has influenced default models to this day, and therefore it is worth showing the final model here:

$$Z = 0.012X_1 + 0.014X_2 + 0.033X_3$$
$$+ 0.006X_4 + 0.999X_5 \tag{1}$$

where

*X*<sup>1</sup> = working capital/total assets,

*X*<sup>2</sup> = retained earnings/total assets,

*X*<sup>3</sup> = earnings before interest and taxes/total assets,

*X*<sup>4</sup> = market value of equity/book value of total debt, and

*X*<sup>5</sup> = sales/total assets.

A large value of *Z* indicates high credit quality; the firm is far from its default threshold. The simplicity of this model makes it deceptively easy to criticize: have the coefficients remained the same? is it applicable to all industries (financial firms are typically much more highly leveraged—*X*<sup>4</sup> is small—than nonfinancial firms) or all countries? is the relationship really linear in the conditioning variables? and why are nonfinancial variables such as firm age or some measure of management quality not considered? However, the Altman *Z*-score endures to this day; it can be found for most publicly traded firms on any Bloomberg terminal.

The next important innovation in credit modeling is arguably Merton's [32] option-based default model (*see* **Default Barrier Models**). Merton recognized that a lender is effectively writing a put option on the assets of the borrowing firm; owners and ownermanagers (i.e., shareholders) hold the call option. Thus a firm is expected to default when the value of its assets falls below a threshold value determined by its liabilities. To this day all credit models owe an intellectual debt to Merton's insights. The best-known commercial application of the Merton model is the Moody's KMV EDF (expected default frequency) model.

Clearly, quantitative information obtained from (public) accounting data, metrics such as leverage, profitability, debt service coverage, and liquidity, is important for arriving at a credit assessment of a firm. In addition, a rating agency, because it has access to private information about the firm, can and does include qualitative information such as the quality of management [3, 28]. Indeed this is partly what makes credit rating agencies unique and important: they aggregate public and private information into a single measure of creditworthiness (riskiness) and then make that summary statistic—the credit rating—public, essentially providing a public good [47]. By contrast a Moody's KMV EDF makes use only of public information, although it transforms this information using a proprietary methodology.g In fact, rating agencies are in the business of not just information production but, in the words of Boot *et al.* [12], they also act as "information equalizers" [quotes in the original]. In this way, they serve as a coordinating mechanism or focal point to the financial markets.

### **Model Performance**

All credit scoring or rating models map a set of financial and nonfinancial variables into the unit interval: the objective is to generate a probability of default, to separate the defaulters from the nondefaulters. Unsurprisingly, there is a plethora of modeling choices as documented, for instance, by Resti and Sironi [41]. However, in the horse race of default prediction models, the hazard approach as shown in [16, 42] seems to be emerging as the winner. See [11] for a recent overview. While we can say little about the performance on bank internal credit scoring models—they are proprietary—we can examine the empirical default experience of firms with a rating from a credit rating agency.

Highly rated firms default quite rarely. For example, Moody's reports that the 1-year investment grade default rate over the period 1983–2007 was 0.069% or 6.9 bp [35]. This is an average over four letter grade ratings: Aaa through Baa. Thus in a pool of 10 000 investment grade obligors or instruments we would expect seven defaults over the course of 1 year. But what if only four default? What about 11? Higher than expected default could be the result of either bad luck or a bad model, and it is very hard to distinguish between the two, especially for small probabilities (see also [29] and **Backtesting**). Indeed the use of the regulatory color scheme—green, amber, red—which is behind the 1996 Market Risk Amendment to the Basel I, was motivated precisely by this recognition, and in that case the probability to be validated is comparatively large 1% (for 99% VaR) [8] with daily data.

Although rating agencies insist that their ratings scale reflects an ordinal ranking of credit risk, they also publish default rates for different horizons by rating. Thus we would expect default rates or probabilities to be monotonically increasing as one descends the credit spectrum. Using S&P rating histories, Hanson and Schuermann [23] show formally that monotonicity is violated frequently for most notch-level investment grade 1-year estimated default probabilities. The precision of the PD point estimates is quite low; there have been no defaults over 1 year for triple-A or AA+ (Aa1) rated firms, yet surely we do not believe that the 1-year probability of default is identically equal to zero. The new Basel Capital Accord (*see* **Regulatory Capital**), perhaps with this in mind, has set a lower bound of 3 bp for any PD estimate (10, §285), commensurate with about a single-A rating. Truck and Rachev [46] show the eco- ¨ nomic impact resulting from such uncertainty using bank internal ratings and a corresponding loan portfolio. Pluto and Tasche [40] propose a conservative approach to generating PD estimates for low-default portfolios.

Despite this lack of statistical precision, Kliger and Sarig [26] show that bond ratings contain pricerelevant information by taking advantage of a natural experiment. On April 26, 1982, Moody's introduced overnight modifiers to their rating system, much like the notching used by S&P and Fitch, effectively introducing finer credit rating information about their issuer base without any change in the firm fundamentals. They find that bond prices indeed adjust to the new information, as do stock prices, and that any gains enjoyed by bondholders are offset by losses suffered by stockholders.

Although the 1-year horizon is typical in credit analysis (and is also the horizon used in Basel II), most traded credit instruments have longer maturity. For example, the typical CDS contract (*see* **Credit Default Swaps**) is five years, and over that horizon there are positive empirical default rates for Aaa and Aa, which Moody's reports to be 7.8 bp and 18.3 bp, respectively [35].

The preceding discussion highlights the difficulty of accurately forecasting such small PDs. Empirical estimates of PDs using credit rating histories can be quite noisy, even with over 25 years of data. Under the new Basel Capital Accord (Basel II), US regulators would require banks to have a minimum of seven nondefault rating categories [21].

### **Internal Ratings**

With the roll-out of the New Basel Capital Accord, internal credit ratings will become widespread. To qualify for the internal-ratings-based (IRB) approach (*see* **Internal-ratings-based Approach**), which allows a bank to use its own internal credit rating, the accord provides the following rather nonspecific guidance (10, §461):

Banks must use information and techniques that take appropriate account of the long-run experience when estimating the average PD for each rating grade. For example, banks may use one or more of the three specific techniques set out below: internal default experience, mapping to external data, and statistical default models.

Since bank internal ratings are proprietary, not much is known (publicly) about their exact construction or about their performance. Carey and Hrycay's [15] study of internal ratings in US banks suggests that such rating systems rely at least to some degree on external ratings themselves, either by using them directly, when available, or calibrating internal credit scores to external ratings. Several books by practitioners and academics with practitioner experience, for example, [18, 30, 38, 41], indicate that the methods used are, perhaps unsurprisingly, much along the lines of the models covered above: statistical approaches—discriminant models in the manner of Altman's *Z*-score, logistic regression, neural networks, decision trees, and so on—that make use of firm financials, augmented with a judgmental overlay that incorporates qualitative information. This more intangible information is especially important when lending to small and young firms with no footprint in the capital markets, as shown, for instance, by Peterson and Rajan [39]. Ashcraft [5] documents that the failure of even healthy banks is followed by largely permanent declines in real activity, which is attributed to the destruction of private information about informationally opaque borrowers. There are now some papers emerging that attempt to formalize the incorporation of qualitative and subjective information, for example, from a loan officer, into bank internal credit scores or ratings. See, for instance, [25, 45].

### **Ratings for Structured Credit Products**

Corporate bond (obligor) ratings are largely based on firm-specific risk characteristics. Since ABS structures represent claims on cash flows from a *portfolio* of underlying assets, the rating of a structured credit product must take into account systematic risk. It is correlated losses that matter especially for the more senior (higher rated) tranches, and loss correlation arises through dependence on shared or common (or systematic) risk factors.h For ABS deals that have a large number of underlying assets, for instance, mortgage-backed securities (MBS), the portfolio is large enough such that all idiosyncratic risk is diversified away leaving only systematic exposure to the risk factors particular to that product class (here, mortgages). By contrast, a substantial amount of idiosyncratic risk may remain in ABS transactions with smaller asset pools, for instance, CDOs [4, 17].

Because these deals are portfolios, the effect of correlation is not the same for all tranches (*see* **CDO Tranches: Impact on Economic Capital**): equity tranche holders prefer higher correlation, whereas senior tranches prefer lower correlation (tail losses are driven by loss correlation). As correlation increases, so does portfolio loss volatility. The payoff function for the equity tranche is, true to its name, like a call option. Indeed equity itself is a call option on the assets of the underlying firm, and the value of a call option is increasing in volatility. If the equity tranche is long a call option, then the senior tranche is short a call option, so that their payoffs behave in an opposite manner. The impact of increased correlation on the value of mezzanine tranches is ambiguous and depends on the structure of a particular deal [19]. By contrast, correlation with systematic risk factors should not matter for corporate ratings (*see also* **Base Correlation** and **Modeling Correlation of Structured Instruments in a Portfolio Setting** for details on default correlation modeling).

As a result of the portfolio nature of the rated products, the ratings migration behavior may also be different than for ordinary obligor ratings. Moody's Investors Services [34] reports that rating changes are much more common for corporate bond than for structured product ratings, but the magnitude of changes (number of notches up- or downgraded) was nearly double for the structured products.i There are potentially two reasons for this difference: model error or greater sensitivity of performance to systemic factors.

The modeling approach for rating structured credit products is in flux as of this writing, driven by the poor performance during the turmoil in the credit markets in 2007 and 2008. Moody's, for instance, has recently proposed adding two new risk measures for structured finance transactions [36]. First, an "assumption volatility score" (or "V Score") that would rate the uncertainty of a rating and the potential for future ratings volatility on a scale of 1–5 (low to high). Second, a "loss sensitivity" that would estimate the number of notches a tranche would be downgraded if the expected loss of the collateral pool were increased to the 95th percentile of the original loss distribution. Moody's decided to develop these risk measures in addition to rather than in substitution for the standard credit ratings, which are on the same scale as their corporate ratings, precisely to allow investors to make a baseline comparison to other rated securities.

### **End Notes**

a*.* Any views expressed represent those of the authors only and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System.

b*.* For no reason other than convenience and expediency, we make use of the Fitch and S&P nomenclature for the remainder of the article.

c*.* As of this writing, there are ten "accredited" rating agencies in the United States (see [6] for a discussion on what it means to be "accredited"): A.M. Best, Dominion Bond Rating Service (DBRS), Egan-Jones Rating Company, Fitch Inc., Japan Credit Rating Agency Ltd., Moody's Investors Services, Inc., LACE Financial Corp., Rating and Investment Information, Inc, Realpoint LLC, Standard & Poor's Ratings Services. There are several other firms that provide credit opinions; one such example is Eagan–Jones Rating. An extensive list of rating agencies across the globe can be found at http://www.defaultrisk.com/rating agencies. htm. For an exposition of the history of the credit rating industry, see [47]. For a detailed institutional discussion, see [14].

d*.* Specifically, *EL* = *P D* × *LGD*, where LGD is loss given default. However, given the paucity of LGD data, little variation in EL that exists at the obligor (as opposed to instrument) level can be attributed to variation in LGD making the distinction between the agencies modest at best. e*.* See http://www.fitchratings.com/corporate/fitchResources. cfm?detail=1&rd file=intro#rtng actn.

f*.* This view was recently reinforced in [13]; both authors work for Moody's.

g*.* In particular, the mapping from distance-to-default to EDF is proprietary.

h*.* Note that correlation includes more than just economic conditions, as it includes (i) model risk by the agencies, (ii) originator and arranger effects, and (iii) servicer effects.

i*.* The recent rash of downgrades for structured credit products in the wake of the subprime credit crisis may change this stylized fact.

### **References**

- [1] Allen, L., DeLong, G. & Saunders, A. (2004). Issues in the credit risk modeling of retail markets, *Journal of Banking and Finance* **28**, 727–752.
- [2] Altman, E.I. (1968). Financial ratios, discriminant analysis and the prediction of corporate bankruptcy, *Journal of Finance* **20**, 589–609.
- [3] Altman, E.I. & Rijken, H.A. (2004). How rating agencies achieve rating stability, *Journal of Banking and Finance* **28**, 2679–2714.
- [4] Amato, J.D. & Remolona, E.M. (2005). *The Pricing of Unexpected Credit Losses*. BIS Working Paper No. 190.
- [5] Ashcraft, A. (2005). Are banks really special? New evidence from the FDIC-induced failure of healthy banks, *American Economic Review* **95**, 1712–1730.
- [6] Ashcraft, A. & Schuermann, T. (2008). *Understanding the Securitization of Subprime Mortgage Credit*. *Foundations and Trends in Finance* **2** 191–309.
- [7] Bangia, A., Diebold, F.X., Kronimus, A., Schagen, C. & Schuermann, T. (2002). Ratings migration and the business cycle, with applications to credit portfolio stress testing, *Journal of Banking and Finance* **26**(2/3), 445–474.
- [8] Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (1996). *Amendment to the Capital Accord to Incorporate Market Risks*. Basel Committee Publication No. 24. Available: www.bis.org/publ/bcbs24.pdf.
- [9] Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2000). *Credit Ratings and Complementary Sources of Credit Quality Information*. BCBS Working Paper No. 3, available at http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs wp3.htm.
- [10] Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2005). *International Convergence of Capital Measurement and Capital Standards: A Revised Framework* . Available at http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs118.htm.
- [11] Bharath, S.T. & Shumway, T. (2008). Forecasting default with the Merton distance to default model, *Review of Financial Studies* **21**, 1339–1369.
- [12] Boot, A.W.A., Milbourn, T.T. & Schmeits, A. (2006). Credit ratings as coordination mechanisms, *Review of Financial Studies* **19**, 81–118.
- [13] Cantor, R. & Mann, C. (2007). Analyzing the tradeoff between ratings accuracy and stability, *Journal of Fixed Income* **16**(4), 60–68.
- [14] Cantor, R. & Packer, F. (1995). The credit rating industry, *Journal of Fixed Income* **5**(3), 10–34.
- [15] Carey, M. & Hrycay, M. (2001). Parameterizing credit risk models with rating data, *Journal of Banking and Finance* **25**, 197–270.
- [16] Chava, S. & Jarrow, R.A. (2004). Bankruptcy prediction with industry effects, *Review of Finance* **8**, 537–569.

- [17] Committee on the Global Financial System (2005). *The Role of Ratings in Structured Finance: Issues and Implications*. Available at http://www.bis.org/publ/ cgfs23.htm, January.
- [18] Crouhy, M., Galai, D. & Mark, R. (2000). *Risk Management*, McGraw-Hill, New York.
- [19] Duffie, Darrell. (2007). *Innovations in Credit Risk Transfer: Implications for Financial Stability*. Stanford University GSB Working Paper, available at http://www.stanford.edu/∼duffie/BIS.pdf.
- [20] The Economist (2007). *Measuring the Measurers*. May 31.
- [21] Federal Reserve Board (2003). *Supervisory Guidance on Internal Ratings-Based Systems for Corporate Credit*. Attachment 2 in http://www.federalreserve.gov/ boarddocs/meetings/2003/20030711/attachment.pdf.
- [22] Gross, D. & Souleles, N. (2002). An empirical analysis of personal bankruptcy and delinquency, *Review of Financial Studies* **15**, 319–347.
- [23] Hanson, S.G. & Schuermann, T. (2006). Confidence intervals for probabilities of default, *Journal of Banking and Finance* **30**(8), 2281–2301.
- [24] Kealhofer, S. & Kurbat, M. (2002). Predictive Merton models, *Risk* February, 67–71.
- [25] Kiefer, N. (2007). The probability approach to default estimation, *Risk* July, 146–150.
- [26] Kliger, D. & Sarig, O. (2000). The information value of bond ratings, *Journal of Finance* **55**(6), 2879–2902.
- [27] Lando, D. & Skødeberg, T. (2002). Analyzing ratings transitions and rating drift with continuous observations, *Journal of Banking and Finance* **26**(2/3), 423–444.
- [28] Loffler, G. (2004). Ratings versus market-based mea- ¨ sures of default risk in portfolio governance, *Journal of Banking and Finance* **28**, 2715–2746.
- [29] Lopez, J.A. & Saidenberg, M. (2000). Evaluating credit risk models, *Journal of Banking and Finance* **24**, 151–165.
- [30] Marrison, C. (2002). *Fundamentals of Risk Measurement*, McGraw Hill, New York.
- [31] Mason, J.R. & Rosner, J. (2007). *Where Did the Risk Go? How Misapplied Bond Ratings Cause Mortgage Backed Securities and Collateralized Debt Obligation Market Disruptions*. Hudson Institute Working Paper.
- [32] Merton, R.C. (1974). On the pricing of corporate debt: the risk structure of interest rates, *Journal of Finance* **29**, 449–470.
- [33] Moody's Investors Services (1999). *Rating Methodology: The Evolving Meanings of Moody's Bond Ratings*, Moody's Global Credit Research, New York.
- [34] Moody's Investors Services (2007). *Structured Finance Rating Transitions: 1983–2006*. Special Comment, Moody's Global Credit Research, New York.
- [35] Moody's Investors Services (2008). *Corporate Default and Recovery Rates: 1920–2007*. Special Comment, Moody's Global Credit Research, New York.

- [36] Moody's Investors Services (2008). *Introducing Assumption Volatility Scores and Loss Sensitivities for Structured Finance Securities*, Moody's Global Credit Policy, New York.
- [37] Nickell, P., Perraudin, W. & Varotto, S. (2000). Stability of rating transitions, *Journal of Banking and Finance* **24**, 203–227.
- [38] Ong, M.K. (1999). *Internal Credit Risk Models: Capital Allocation and Performance Measurement*, Risk Books, London.
- [39] Peterson, M.A. & Rajan, R. (2002). Does distance still matter: the information revolution in small business lending, *Journal of Finance* **57**, 2533–2570.
- [40] Pluto, K. & Tasche, D. (2005). Thinking positively, *Risk* August, 76–82.
- [41] Resti, A. & Sironi, A. (2007). *Risk Management and Shareholders' Value in Banking*, John Wiley & Sons, New York.
- [42] Shumway, T. (2001). Forecasting bankruptcy more accurately: a simple hazard model, *Journal of Business* **74**, 101–124.
- [43] Standard and Poor's (2001). *Rating Methodology: Evaluating the Issuer*, Standard & Poor's Credit Ratings, New York.
- [44] Standard and Poor's (2007). *Principles-Based Rating Methodology for Global Structured Finance Securities*, Standard & Poor's RatingsDirect Research, New York.
- [45] Stefanescu, C., Tunaru, R. & Turnbull, S. (2008). *The Credit Rating Process and Estimation of Transition Probabilities: A Bayesian Approach*. London Business School working paper.
- [46] Truck, S. & Rachev, S.T. (2005). Credit portfolio risk ¨ and PD confidence sets through the business cycle, *Journal of Credit Risk* **1**(4), 61–88.
- [47] White, L. (2002). The credit rating industry: an industrial organization analysis, in *Ratings, Rating Agencies and the Global Financial System*, R.M. Levich, C. Reinhart & G. Majnoni, eds, Kluwer, Amsterdam, NL. pp. 41–64.

## **Related Articles**

**Collateralized Debt Obligations (CDO)**; **Credit Migration Models**; **Credit Risk**; **CreditRisk+**; **Credit Scoring**; **Internal-ratings-based Approach**; **Rating Transition Matrices**; **Structured Finance Rating Methodologies**.

ADAM ASHCRAFT & TIL SCHUERMANN