# **CONSTITUTIONAL INTERPRETATION**

# CHINTAN CHANDRACHUD\*

### **I. INTRODUCTION**

HOW do you interpret the world's lengthiest codified Constitution? The Indian Supreme Court shoulders the daunting responsibility of fleshing out meaning from the text that governs 1.2 billion people, in twenty-nine States, speaking twenty-two constitutionally recognised languages (not to mention hundreds of dialects) and practising virtually every mainstream religion of the world. It is perhaps unsurprising, then, that the Supreme Court has had plenty of 'interpreting' to do over the years. From 1950 to 2009, the Court sat in benches of five or more judges to decide substantial questions of law involving the interpretation of the Constitution on 1,532 occasions.<sup>1</sup> This chapter seeks to provide an analytical snapshot of the Supreme Court's interpretive methodology, focusing on how the Court has dealt with questions of permanence and change, fidelity, and dynamism—all of which are central to the functioning of a constitutional democracy.

Constitutional interpretation bears an intricate relationship with constitutional change more generally. Interpretive theories are often justified by how easy or difficult it is to amend a constitution. The formal process of amending a constitution gives rise to inferences about the legitimate agent of constitutional change, as well as the most convenient vehicle for such change. Most provisions of the Indian Constitution can be amended with a two-thirds majority in Parliament.<sup>2</sup> Amendments affecting federal issues require, in addition, the ratification of at least half of the State legislatures.<sup>3</sup> In practice, the Indian Constitution has been amended very frequently—on average, more than once a year. In spite of having been around for close to a quarter of the time of the US Constitution, it has been formally amended about four times more frequently than that Constitution. $4$ 

The structure and composition of a court have an important bearing on its interpretive approach.<sup>5</sup> The Indian Supreme Court does not sit *en banc*, but instead in separate benches or panels of judges. Article 145(3) of the Constitution requires all substantial questions of law involving interpretation of the Constitution (an expression that is not defined by the text) to be decided by benches of no less than five judges (known as 'constitutional benches'). The Court sees safety in numbers, because larger benches of the Court bind smaller benches,  $\frac{6}{9}$  and a judgment of the Court can only be overruled by a bench of a larger size. The Chief Justice plays the leading role in setting rosters and making decisions about bench composition. $<sup>7</sup>$ </sup>

This chapter argues that the interpretive approaches of the Supreme Court can be expounded through three historical phases. In the first phase, the Court relied heavily on textualism, reading the Constitution word for word, without reflecting on its overall structure and coherence. In the second phase, the Court's interpretive approaches were more eclectic, focusing not only on the text of specific constitutional provisions, but also on the structure and themes embodied within the Constitution more broadly. During both of these phases, most significant interpretive decisions were entrusted to constitutional benches and were the product of careful reasoning. In the third phase,

however, the Court moved to an approach that I describe as '*panchayati* eclecticism'. To some extent, it relinquished its responsibility to give reasons. Sitting in benches of two or three judges, the Court (or more fittingly, its smaller 'sub-courts') started deciding cases based on self-conceptions of its own role, resulting in the adoption of a variety of internally inconsistent interpretive approaches, and often producing incoherent constitutional jurisprudence.

The changes in the Supreme Court's interpretive outlook were glacial, making it difficult to cleanly separate these three phases from one another. The first phase, and in particular, the second phase, saw many outliers and dissents from dominant approaches to interpretation. The third phase has not been dominated by any single method of interpretation—in fact, its distinctiveness lies in the resultoriented approach adopted by the Court, making interpretation of constitutional text instrumental to the Court's desired result. So although the first two phases can be situated more comfortably into global paradigms of constitutional interpretation, the third phase is more conducive to an indigenous framework of analysis.

## **II. HOW TO READ CONSTITUTIONS**

A codified constitution is a nation's founding document, which not only constitutes the nation, but also establishes the rules for its governance.<sup>8</sup> The principal difference between nations with a codified constitution and those with an uncodified constitution is that in the case of the former, the basic rules of the game have been entrenched by insulating them from the control of ordinary legislative majorities. Constitutions are framed at a high level of abstraction, enabling those that work them some room for manoeuvre in coping with unforeseen challenges.<sup>9</sup> Even the Indian Constitution—which originally contained 395 Articles and 8 Schedules, and now comprises over 450 Articles and 12 Schedules, and provides levels of detail that are unusual in the marketplace of constitutional texts  $\frac{10}{10}$ consists of many provisions that are framed in highly abstract terms. Aside from fairly straightforward provisions about matters such as age limits $\frac{11}{11}$  and terms of office,  $\frac{12}{11}$  constitutional provisions generally demand some form of value-laden interpretation by courts.<sup>13</sup>

Constitutional interpretation is the product of two meta-judgments. First, what is the legitimate source of the constitution's authority? Possible responses could rely on the credentials of the body that framed the constitution, the fact that the constitution was accepted as a legitimate pre-commitment at its founding, or that the constitution is still accepted as a social fact by the people it governs. Second, based on the source of the constitution's authority, what are the tools and techniques that can be relied upon in order to expound constitutional meaning? So, for example, is it permissible to cite the views of individual framers of the constitution, Constituent Assembly debates, or dictionaries to understand the implications of a broadly worded equality clause?

Philip Bobbitt identifies six approaches to constitutional interpretation: historical (or originalist), textual, prudential, doctrinal, structural, and ethical.<sup>14</sup> The historical approach leans heavily upon what a particular constitutional provision would have meant to its framers. The focus is on the subjective intent of the framers, and how they would have wished the constitutional provision to operate within the confines of a particular case. It equates constitutional authority with consent. The argument runs somewhat like this: '[t]he Framers of the Constitution proposed a compact to limit the power of government; the people signified their agreement to that compact by their ratification of the

Constitution, and that agreement is what gives the Constitution its authority.<sup> $15$ </sup> There are many different strands of originalism,  $\frac{16}{10}$  but its intuitive appeal lies in the fact that it claims to offer a method of interpretation that is objective.

Textualism also focuses on the specific words of a constitutional provision, but requires interpreters to consider the 'present sense' of the text, rather than the meaning of the text at the time that it was enacted.<sup>17</sup> As Justice Scalia of the US Supreme Court notes, textualists look for an 'objectified' intent from the language of the provision. $\frac{18}{10}$  On the other hand, the prudential approach focuses on the use of pragmatic logic in the shaping of constitutional doctrine, and generally has traction in periods of emergency and unrest.<sup>19</sup> The doctrinal approach considers the constitutional text as only a limited piece of the evidence required to interpret the constitution, forming part of a line of precedents expounding upon the meaning of the constitutional provision.<sup>20</sup>

Both structural and ethical approaches rely on inference rather than on close reading of text. Structural arguments rely on the structures of government set up by the constitution, whereas ethical approaches appeal to aspects of cultural ethos that are reflected in the constitution. One version of structuralism, which Amar labels as 'intratextualism', requires interpreters to read a particular phrase or expression in the context of a different part of the constitution containing the same, or a similar, phrase.<sup>21</sup> Structuralist arguments are appealing because they treat the constitution as an organic whole, rather than as a collection of autonomous provisions that are isolated from their natural environment.

These interpretive approaches are useful in classifying the different ways in which courts may choose to construe a constitutional provision that forms the subject of dispute. However, courts rarely rely on one of these approaches exclusively. The real picture is far more messy, reflecting the adoption of a fusion of different interpretive approaches, perhaps with different levels of emphasis. Most Supreme Court judgments are expected to be heavily precedent-laden, which means that the doctrinal approach undergirds the other approaches adopted by the Court. Further, a rhetorical tool that judges often rely upon is to argue that all interpretive approaches point to the same conclusion. $22$ This kind of argument is meant to satisfy all interpretive camps, through the Court's refusal to unreservedly align itself with any of them (or conversely, its willingness to express limited support for all of them).

#### **III. PHASE ONE: TEXTUALISM**

In its early years, the Supreme Court adopted a textualist approach, focusing on the plain meaning of the words used in the Constitution. *AK Gopalan v State of Madras <sup>23</sup>* was one of the early decisions in which the Court was called upon to interpret the fundamental rights under Part III. The case was a *habeas corpus* petition filed by the leader of the Communist Party of India, who had been detained under preventive detention legislation.  $24$  He claimed that the legislation was inconsistent with Articles 19 (the right to seven freedoms), 21 (the right to life), and 22 (the protection against arrest and detention) of the Constitution. The Supreme Court was faced with deciding two important interpretive questions. First, Article 21 provided that '[n]o person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to procedure established by law'. What did the expression 'procedure established by law' mean? It could either have meant any procedure that was validly

enacted into primary legislation by Parliament (which would result in Article 21 being a safeguard only against executive action), or could include a substantive component, resembling the 'due process' clauses of the US Constitution.<sup>25</sup> Secondly, what was the interrelationship between Articles 19, 21, and 22 of the Constitution, which, at first glance, appeared to cover similar ground?

Constitutional history had something to say on these questions. On the first question, there was plenty of evidence to suggest that the framers had adopted the phrase 'procedure established by law' instead of 'due process of law' to avoid the American *Lochner*-era experience. <sup>26</sup> On the second question, evidence from the report of the Drafting Committee of the Constituent Assembly suggested that Article 21 was intended to cover separate territory from Article 19. The judgments of the majority and minority agreed that this history was irrelevant in construing the constitutional provisions.<sup>27</sup> Kania CJ, for the majority, adopted a black-letter approach, construing the constitutional text based on its plain meaning. He held that the expression 'procedure established by law' must mean, based on its ordinary interpretation, the procedure prescribed by the statutory law of the State. $\frac{28}{3}$  On the second question, he decided that Articles 19, 21, and 22 covered entirely different subject matter, and were to be read as separate codes. This textualist approach was unsurprising, given that the judges were trained in British interpretive traditions.<sup>29</sup> In Britain, the use of legislative history to construe statutory provisions was, until the House of Lords' decision in *Pepper v Hart*, 30 avoided on the conviction that doing so would violate parliamentary privilege.<sup>31</sup> In contrast, Fazl Ali J and Patanjali Sastri J preferred structuralism over historicism and textualism, pointing out that the scheme of **Part III** of the Constitution suggested the existence of a degree of overlap between Articles 19, 21, and 22.

Amongst the most controversial questions in Indian constitutional jurisprudence has been whether there are any limitations on Parliament's power to amend the Constitution, especially fundamental rights. As I stated earlier, Article 368 enables the Union Parliament, by two-thirds majority, to amend the Constitution. Amendments to fundamental rights under **Part III** do not require the ratification of States. Article 13(2) provides that '[t]he State shall not make any law which takes away or abridges the rights conferred by this Part [the chapter on fundamental rights] and any law made in contravention of this clause shall, to the extent of the contravention, be void'. The Constitution was amended eight times in its first ten years. A question that frequently arose was whether the word 'law' in Article 13(2) included constitutional amendments. If it did, then the chapter on fundamental rights would be rendered immune from amendment.

This question arose tangentially before five-judge benches of the Supreme Court, first in *Sri Sankari Prasad Singh Deo v Union of India*, <sup>32</sup> and later, in *Sajjan Singh v State of Rajasthan*. 33 In *Sankari Prasad*, the Court adopted an avowedly textualist approach, finding that any intended limitations on the power to amend fundamental rights would have been clearly expressed in the text of Articles 13(2) and 368. As Patanjali Sastri J noted:

We find it, however, difficult, in the absence of a clear indication to the contrary, to suppose that they [the framers] also intended to make those [fundamental] rights immune from constitutional amendment … the terms of Article 368 are perfectly general and empower Parliament to amend the Constitution, without any exception whatever.<sup>34</sup>

This statement resembles Justice Scalia's notion of 'objectified intent',  $\frac{35}{2}$  or what Dworkin labels as 'semantic intentions<sup> $36$ </sup> gleaning the intentions of the framers from the words used (and not used) in the Constitution. Gajendragadkar CJ adopted a similar semantic intentions-based textualist approach in *Sajjan Singh*, holding that if the framers had intended to restrict future amendments to **Part III**, they

would have made a specific provision manifesting that intention. He also categorically rejected an ethical approach to interpreting Article 368, noting that it was illegitimate to construe that provision 'on any theoretical concept of political science'. $\frac{37}{12}$  Other judges, however, were not equally convinced. Hidayatullah J and Mudholkar J expressed scepticism about whether the power to amend the Constitution implied a carte blanche to amend fundamental rights. Their scepticism was also framed in textualist arguments. Hidayatullah J turned the prevailing argument on its head by stating that Article 368 *did not say* that every provision of the Constitution could be amended with a twothirds majority.<sup>38</sup> Mudholkar J failed to see why the word 'law' in Article 13(2) could not be read to include constitutional amendments.<sup>39</sup>

Following amendments to the Constitution seeking to protect land reform measures from judicial scrutiny, the same question arose before an eleven-judge bench of the Supreme Court in *Golak Nath v State of Punjab*. <sup>40</sup> On this occasion, the majority on the Court reversed its position on the amendability of fundamental rights. However, the approaches to constitutional interpretation remained largely the same: textualist arguments attracted significant traction in the majority and the minority opinions. The arguments did not centre on how to interpret the Constitution: all the judges seemed to agree that textualism was the pre-eminent approach. Rather, differences between the majority and the minority hinged on what the outcome of a legitimate textualist interpretation would be.

In the majority, Subba Rao J held that the open-ended definition of the word 'law' under Article 13(3) rendered the term wide enough to include constitutional amendments. Further, since the marginal note to Article 368 described the Article as only setting out the 'procedure for amendment' of the Constitution, Parliament's power to amend the Constitution did not emanate from that provision.<sup>41</sup> Therefore, Parliament's power to amend the Constitution was subject to **Part III**. Judges in the minority drew different inferences from the same pieces of constitutional text. Wanchoo J held that the words of Article 368 made it clear that it not only specified the procedure, but also established the power for Parliament to amend any provision of the Constitution.<sup>42</sup> Bachawat J held that since Article 368 allowed Parliament to amend any provision of 'this Constitution', it authorised amendment of 'each and every part' of the Constitution. $\frac{43}{12}$  Ramaswamy J adopted an argument resembling that of Gajendragadkar CJ in *Sajjan Singh*, noting that if the framers conceived of limitations to the amending power, they would have expressly said so in Article 368.<sup>44</sup>

Consistent with previous practice, the Supreme Court consciously avoided relying too much on the views of the framers in the Constituent Assembly Debates. Whereas Wanchoo J held that the Court 'cannot and should not' look into those debates,  $\frac{45}{12}$  Subbao Rao J took a softer position, agreeing to consider them only to reinforce conclusions that were evident from a plain reading of the constitutional text.<sup>46</sup>

Other judgments during this phase manifested similar textualist inclinations. In *MSM Sharma v Sri Krishna Sinha*, <sup>47</sup> the Court was called upon to decide the precise nature of the relationship between parliamentary privileges and the freedom of speech. The case arose in the context of a notice for breach of privilege issued against a journalist for publishing parts of a speech, made in the Bihar Legislative Assembly, that were expunged from the record. Articles 19(1)(a) ('All citizens shall have the right—to freedom of speech and expression') and 194(3) ('the powers, privileges and immunities … shall be such as may from time to time be defined by the Legislature by law, and, until so defined, shall be those of the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom') were ostensibly in conflict. Das CJ held that the freedom of speech, which was a general provision, would yield to

parliamentary privilege, which was a special provision.<sup>48</sup> In his view, if the framers wished to subject parliamentary privileges to the freedom of speech, they would have included express language to that effect in Article  $194(3)$ .<sup>49</sup> This was in spite of the curious outcome produced by textualist interpretation—that so long as the legislature chose not to define them, privileges would override the freedom of speech, but as soon as it broke away from the privileges of the House of Commons by enacting legislation, they would yield to the freedom of speech.<sup>50</sup>

Throughout this phase, the Supreme Court adopted a form of interpretation that was familiar to British legal training.<sup>51</sup> The Court considered this interpretive methodology as a virtue in itself, and was not dictated by outcomes. As the case law interpreting Articles 13 and 368 shows, the reluctance of judges to lean heavily upon historical, structural, or ethical arguments was the product of genuine conviction about the legitimacy of textualist interpretation, rather than a reverse-engineered approach that was outcome-oriented.

A more sceptical reading of the Supreme Court's jurisprudence during this phase might be offered —could it be said that cases such as *Gopalan* and *MSM Sharma* show that the Court was pro-State (rather than textualist) in its interpretive outlook? *Golak Nath*, in which the Court used textualist arguments to clip the wings of the government, rebuts this claim. The Court's turnaround on the amendability of fundamental rights in that case was not coupled with, as Sathe claims, 'a major change in its interpretive methodology'.<sup>52</sup> Major changes in constitutional doctrine took place within the framework of a steady interpretive outlook. Empirical evidence also negates this sceptical reading. In the first seventeen years of its functioning, the Supreme Court struck down legislation in 128 (or approximately one-quarter) of the 487 cases in which it was challenged.<sup>53</sup> At 40 per cent, the government's loss rate in cases before the Supreme Court was particularly high.<sup>54</sup> This was a quite remarkable record for a Court still seeking to establish its legitimacy in a newly independent democracy.

### **IV. PHASE TWO: STRUCTURE-DOMINATED ECLECTICISM**

In the second phase, the Supreme Court began exploring other methods of interpretation. Although textualism continued to appeal to the judges, it was gradually overtaken by structuralism, and occasionally supplemented by other methods of interpretation, such as ethicalism. The leading case of *Kesavananda Bharati v State of Kerala* demonstrates this shift in interpretive methodology. 55 In the context of further amendments to the Constitution in the tussle between the Supreme Court and Parliament over the validity of land reform legislation, the Court was once again tasked with considering the scope of Parliament's power to amend the Constitution. This time, the decision was entrusted to a thirteen-judge bench, which was legally capable of overruling *Golak Nath*. Eleven separate opinions were delivered. As is well known, the majority on the Court is understood to have held that Parliament can amend any provision of the Constitution (including fundamental rights),  $\frac{56}{ }$  so long as it does not alter, abrogate, or destroy the 'basic structure' or 'essential features' of the Constitution—an open-ended catalogue of features that lies within the exclusive control of the Court.

What this chapter is interested in is not so much the outcome of *Kesavananda*, but the manner in which the judges arrived at it. Textualist arguments continued to hold sway, both for the judges who subscribed to the 'basic structure' notion and for those who held that there were no substantive

limitations on Parliament's amending power. Khanna J's judgment, which commentators consider as the clinching opinion,  $\frac{57}{2}$  is framed in textualist terms. He pointed out that the word 'amendment' in Article 368 necessarily implied that the Constitution, post-amendment, would continue to subsist without a loss of identity. The following extract bears this out:  $\frac{58}{5}$ 

The words 'amendment of this Constitution' and 'the Constitution shall stand amended' in Article 368 show that what is amended is the existing Constitution and what emerges as a result of amendment is not a new and different Constitution …

He also categorically rejected appeals to structuralist interpretation, observing that the notion of implied limitations on Parliament's power of amendment was not based on an express provision of the Constitution, and thus should be regarded as 'essentially nebulous'.<sup>59</sup> But Ray J relied on those very words of Article 368 to hold that no provision of the Constitution was beyond the reach of Parliament.<sup>60</sup> Chandrachud J similarly held that the language of Article 368 offered intrinsic evidence that the word 'amendment' was not used in an insular sense, but was intended to have a wide amplitude.<sup>61</sup> Other judges drew inferences from the absence of any express limitations in Article 368. Palekar J held that if the framers considered it necessary to exempt any part of the Constitution from amendment, they would have done so in Article 368 itself, as was done in Article V of the US Constitution.<sup>62</sup> Beg J refused to acknowledge any distinction between 'more basic' or 'less basic' parts of the Constitution, arguing that no such limitation was provided for in the text.<sup>63</sup>

Nonetheless, the shift towards structuralist interpretation was clearly discernible. Shelat J and Grover J held that the word 'amendment' in Article 368 needed to be construed with reference to the scheme of the Constitution as a whole. Sikri CJ relied on intra-textualist argument, highlighting that the word 'amend' was employed to mean different things in different provisions of the Constitution its real content could only be gleaned with reference to the structure of the Constitution. Still others, such as Hegde and Mukherjea JJ, relied on both textual<sup>64</sup> and structural<sup>65</sup> arguments in support of their conclusions.

Soon after the judgment in *Kesavananda Bharati*, a national emergency was declared by the ruling Congress government to quell opposition and protect the political office of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, after her election to Parliament was set aside on the basis that she had engaged in corrupt practices.<sup>66</sup> Opposition leaders were detained en masse, and the right to move courts for the enforcement of fundamental rights under Articles 14 (the right to equality), 19 (the right to freedom), 21 (the right to life), and 22 (the right against arbitrary arrest and detention) had been suspended. In ADM Jabalpur *v* Shivakant Shukla, <sup>67</sup> the Supreme Court was tasked with deciding the politically charged question of whether detainees could challenge their detention in *habeas corpus* proceedings. In a partial retreat to textual interpretation, the majority held that there was no right of personal liberty that existed above and beyond that specified in the Constitution. However, Khanna J (who had adopted a textualist interpretation in *Kesavananda Bharati*), in a dissent likened to that of Lord Atkin in *Liversidge*, <sup>68</sup> embraced an ethical approach by stating that the right to life and personal liberty existed even in the absence of Article 21. Even though there was a textual basis for the same argument, <sup>69</sup> Khanna J chose to focus on the ethical argument, which would have been immune from a clarificatory constitutional amendment overturning the judgment—a phenomenon that was ubiquitous at the time.

The strides towards structuralist interpretation made in *Kesavananda* were consolidated by a fivejudge bench of the Supreme Court in *Minerva Mills v Union of India*. <sup>70</sup> Parliament sought to overturn the basic structure doctrine by adding the following sub-clauses to Article 368:

(4) No amendment of this Constitution… made or purporting to have been made under this article … shall be called in question in any court on any ground.

(5) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that there shall be no limitation whatever on the constituent power of Parliament to amend by way of addition, variation or repeal the provisions of this Constitution under this article.<sup>11</sup>

If a purely textualist understanding of the basic structure doctrine had been adopted, this amendment would have been decisive. By clarifying that the word 'amendment' was not restricted to altering the non-essential features of the Constitution, the substratum of the doctrine could be considered as having been eliminated. However, the Court made a critical move in favour of structuralist justifications for the basic structure doctrine.<sup>72</sup> Chandrachud CJ struck down the amendment on the basis that the limited power to amend the Constitution was itself a basic feature, which Parliament had no power to transform into an unlimited amending power.<sup>73</sup> Bhagwati J observed that if Parliament could enlarge its limited amending power into an unlimited one, then it would be 'meaningless to place a limitation on the original power of amendment'.<sup>74</sup> Under challenge in *Minerva Mills* was also a constitutional amendment<sup>75</sup> seeking to insulate laws enacted in furtherance of the Directive Principles of State Policy under  $Part IV$  of the Constitution from judicial review, on the basis that they violated Articles 14, 19, and 31. The Court adopted a similarly structuralist approach to interpreting this amendment, holding that Articles 14, 19, and 21 constituted a 'golden triangle' of rights that preserve the dignity of the individual, and that the amendment impermissibly sought to negate two sides of that triangle.<sup>16</sup>

The clause-by-clause interpretation of fundamental rights by the majority in *Gopalan* was also called into question in what is commonly known as the bank nationalisation case.<sup>77</sup> Later, the Supreme Court categorically rejected the *Gopalan* approach in favour of a structuralist one in *Maneka Gandhi v Union of India*, <sup>78</sup> which involved a challenge to a statutory provision under which the passport of the former Prime Minister's daughter-in-law was impounded for political reasons. Part III of the Constitution was conceived as a cohesive bill of rights rather than a miscellaneous grouping of constitutional guarantees. Beg CJ held:

Articles dealing with different fundamental rights … do not represent entirely separate streams … They are all parts of an integrated scheme in the Constitution. Their waters must mix to constitute that grand flow of unimpeded and impartial justice ...<sup>79</sup>

This structuralist conceptualisation of fundamental rights had profound implications, because the State would no longer be able to claim the refuge of the limitation clause of a single fundamental right. Even if it did so, it would still need to establish why other overlapping, interrelated rights remained sufficiently unaffected.

The Court in *Maneka Gandhi* also made it clear that 'procedure established by law' for the purposes of the right to life did not only provide a guarantee of procedural due process, but also included a substantive component. It held that even a procedure provided for by way of primary legislation would need to be 'fair, just and reasonable, not fanciful, oppressive or arbitrary'<sup>80</sup> and should be 'carefully designed to effectuate, not to subvert, the substantive right itself'.<sup>81</sup> This was coupled with a wide reading of the phrase 'personal liberty',  $\frac{82}{2}$  which opened the door to the inclusion of a wide range of unenumerated rights under Article 21. Article 21 was incrementally interpreted to include the rights to privacy,  $\frac{83}{2}$  pollution-free air,  $\frac{84}{2}$  reasonable accommodation,  $\frac{85}{2}$ education, <sup>86</sup> livelihood, <sup>87</sup> health, <sup>88</sup> speedy trial, <sup>89</sup> and free legal aid. <sup>90</sup> In many of these cases, non-
justiciable Directive Principles were read into the right to life, paving the way for the Supreme Court to play an unprecedented role in the governance of the nation.

During this phase, the Supreme Court decided three important cases on the interpretation of constitutional provisions dealing with appointments to the higher judiciary. Article 124(2) provides that Supreme Court judges will be appointed by the President (on the advice of the Union government) after consultation with such of the judges of the Supreme Court and of the High Courts in the States as the President may deem necessary, and in the case of all appointments other than that of the Chief Justice, the Chief Justice shall always be consulted. Article 217(1) contains a similar provision for the appointment of High Court judges. *SP Gupta v Union of India <sup>91</sup>* arose out of writ petitions filed by advocates of the Supreme Court and various High Courts challenging, inter alia, the validity of a government circular concerning appointments of High Court judges. On the question of whether the petitioners satisfied the rules of standing before the Supreme Court, Bhagwati J adopted an ethical approach to interpreting Article 32, noting that the rules made by the Court prescribing the procedure for filing writ petitions in pursuance of Article 32 could not be read literally. The procedure was a 'handmaiden of justice', and the cause of justice could 'never be allowed to be thwarted by any procedural technicalities'. $\frac{92}{9}$  In a confirmation of the jurisprudence enabling public interest litigation petitions to be filed in the Supreme Court and High Courts, <sup>93</sup> Bhagwati J held that any member of the public could file a petition for the enforcement of rights of a person or class of persons that was unable to approach the Court for relief. This appeal to broad notions of justice stood in contrast with the Court's reading of Articles 124(2) and 217(1). The Court accorded primacy to the opinion of the Union government in the process of judicial appointments, based on a literal interpretation of the word 'consultation'. 'Consultation', in the Court's understanding, only required 'taking into account' and 'giving due weight' to the opinion of the consultees. $\frac{94}{7}$  However, when any difference of opinion arose amongst the constitutional functionaries, the final word would rest with the Union government. Any other reading of these provisions would amount to 'bending the language of the Constitution'.<sup>95</sup>

Over a decade later, however, the 'bending' of the language of Articles 124(2) and 217(2) was effectuated. In *Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Association v Union of India*, <sup>96</sup> which is known as the second judges case, a nine-judge bench abandoned the literal interpretation of these provisions. Verma J held that the true meaning of the provisions needed to be discerned from the broader scheme and structure of the Constitution. In this broader constitutional context, the word 'consultation' was meant to signify a limitation on the power of the President to appoint judges. <sup>97</sup> This case prompted a major shift of power in the process of judicial appointments, and led to the establishment of collegiums (consisting of senior judges) for the appointment of Supreme Court and High Court judges.<sup>98</sup> The third judges case, which was understandably precedent-heavy, reinforced this interpretation of the constitutional provisions.  $\frac{99}{9}$  The move towards structuralism was clearly manifested in the Supreme Court's judgments in the second and third judges cases.

Other important judgments of the Supreme Court during this phase also demonstrate the shift towards structuralism, but without deserting other methods of interpretation. Article 356 empowers the President to make a proclamation assuming President's rule over a State in which there is a 'failure of constitutional machinery'. In *SR Bommai v Union of India*,  $\frac{100}{100}$  probably the Supreme Court's most important judgment on federalism, the Court was tasked with determining the scope of Article 356. It interpreted Article 356 bearing in mind the scheme and essential features of the

Constitution, including democracy and federalism.<sup>101</sup> The basic structure doctrine played an important role in the Court's decision, as the Court held that the President could dismiss a State government on the basis that it was likely to act contrary to the basic features of the Constitution.<sup>102</sup> Having said that, it also appealed to the language of Article 356 in delineating the scope for judicial review of Presidential proclamations.<sup>103</sup>

In *Indra Sawhney v Union of India*,  $\frac{104}{100}$  better known as the 'Mandal Commission' case, the Court interpreted Article 16(4) of the Constitution, dealing with reservations in public employment for backward classes of citizens. Structuralist arguments played an important role in the decision, with the Court reasoning that Article 16(4) was not an exception to the other equality clauses, but was in fact a facet of them.<sup>105</sup> Both were considered part of the same scheme established by the framers of the Constitution and were therefore read homogeneously.<sup>106</sup> Textualist arguments propelled the Court's conclusion that the use of the phrase 'backward class of citizens' in Article 16(4), in comparison with the narrower phrase 'socially and educationally backward classes of citizens' in Article 15(4), meant that the former was intended to be a more inclusive provision than the latter.  $\frac{107}{2}$ Both of these interpretive assessments were confirmed through references to the Constituent Assembly Debates.<sup>108</sup>

So, in the second phase, the Supreme Court increasingly began to rely upon the structuralist approach to interpretation. The move towards structuralism was gradual, and even *Kesavananda Bharati*, which is considered a watershed moment in India's constitutional history, did not cleanly break from the past—many of the arguments emanating from the bench remained staunchly textualist. Ethical and historical interpretive approaches also began to find resonance in Supreme Court judgments from time to time. What is common between the first two phases of the interpretive story in the Supreme Court is that significant decisions involving the interpretation of the Constitution were entrusted to constitutional benches, comprising five or more judges, and were carefully (even if incorrectly) reasoned. There was limited scope for precedential confusion, since matters which had been decided by constitutional benches and which demanded reconsideration were referred to larger constitutional benches. Doctrinal disagreements played out *within* multiple opinions of the same judgment, rather than *amongst* different judgments.

## **V. PHASE THREE:** *PANCHAYATI ECLECTICISM*

In the third phase, the Supreme Court's interpretive philosophy turned far more result oriented than it had ever been. The Court often surrendered its responsibility of engaging in a thorough rights reasoning of the issues before it. Two factors underpinned this institutional failure. First, the changing structure of the Court, which at its inception began with eight judges, grew to a sanctioned strength of thirty-one judges. It began to sit in panels of two or three judges, effectively transforming it into a polyvocal<sup>109</sup> group of about a dozen 'sub-Supreme Courts'. Even though Article 145(3) requires all substantial questions of law involving interpretation of the Constitution to be decided by constitutional benches, this requirement was ignored in practice. $\frac{110}{10}$  There appears to be little guidance on what questions could be considered as 'substantial', although the Court's only general criterion—that the question should not have been 'finally and authoritatively decided'<sup>111</sup>—was also overlooked. Judges on smaller benches have felt little obligation to engage with judgments by benches of the same size. There is also a natural tendency for judges on smaller benches to be less well informed, since they have access to a limited range of perspectives from their colleagues.<sup>112</sup> Larger bench decisions are more likely to represent the collective opinion of the Court,  $\frac{113}{2}$  and promote consensus building in decision making. The greater likelihood of dissenting opinions in larger benches encourages judges to engage in robust rights reasoning so as to present their opinion as the most plausible one emanating from the bench. Second, the Court began deciding cases based on a certain conception of its own role—whether as social transformer, sentinel of democracy, or protector of the market economy. This unique decision-making process has sidelined reason giving in preference to arriving at outcomes that match the Court's perception.

These two factors, resulting in a failure to articulate reasons, have rendered the process of interpretation as instrumental to the particular sub-Supreme Court's view of the situation. The failure to give reasons has in fact contributed not only to methodological incoherence, but also to serious doctrinal incoherence and inconsistency across the case law. This can be best described as *panchayati eclecticism, <sup>114</sup>* with different benches adopting inconsistent interpretive approaches based on their conception of the Court's role, and arriving at conclusions that were often in tension with one another. The imagery that *panchayati* eclecticism is meant to invoke is that of a group of wise men and women (or, applying the analogy, sub-Supreme Courts), taking decisions based on notions of fairness that are detached from precedent, doctrine, and established interpretive methods.

Let us consider a few examples. In the space of a few weeks in 2013, the Supreme Court decided three important cases on electoral reform inconsistently, producing awkward constitutional jurisprudence. These cases were decided in the context of what is commonly known as the 'criminalisation of politics', referring to the fact that a significant proportion of parliamentarians face criminal charges.<sup>115</sup> None of these significant cases were decided by constitutional benches. Article 326 provides that elections to the Lower House of Parliament and State legislative assemblies should be on the basis of adult suffrage and:

[E]very person who is a citizen of India and who is not less than eighteen years of age … and is not otherwise disqualified under this Constitution or any law made by the appropriate Legislature on the ground of non-residence, unsoundness of mind, crime or corrupt or illegal practice, shall be entitled to be registered as a voter …

Section 62(5) of the Representation of the People Act 1951 (RPA) denies prisoners the right to vote and section 4 of the same statute stipulates that in order to be a member of the Lower House of Parliament or a State Legislative Assembly, a person must be registered as an 'elector' for a parliamentary or State constituency.

In *Chief Election Commissioner v Jan Chaukidar*, <sup>116</sup> an NGO contended that since prisoners were deprived of the right to vote, they could not be considered as 'electors' and should automatically be disqualified from standing for elections during periods of incarceration. A two-judge bench of the Supreme Court affirmed this contention. One of the key reasons for this decision was that the Court considered the right to vote as a statutory endowment that is conferred (and equally, revoked) by the ordinary legislative process. It cited the Patna High Court's observation that it had 'no hesitation in interpreting the Constitution and the Laws framed under it, read together, that persons in the lawful custody of the Police also will not be voters, in which case, they will neither be electors'.<sup>117</sup> This was a highly textualist reading of Article 326, focusing on the fact that it permits denial of the right to vote on the basis of illegal practices. A structuralist reading could have produced a very different outcome (one that was, as we shall see later, inconsistent with the Court's conception of its role).

After all, India's status as an inclusive, participatory democracy forms part of the basic scheme of the Constitution, and it is questionable whether excluding a large class of people from the vote is consistent with that scheme.<sup>118</sup>

The next electoral case was *Lily Thomas v Union of India*,  $\frac{119}{12}$  in which a two-judge bench interpreted constitutional provisions concerning the disqualifications for membership of Parliament and the State legislatures. Section 8(4) of the RPA gives sitting legislators a period of three months before disqualification operates, enabling them to appeal against their conviction. This statutory provision was challenged on the basis that it contravened Articles 102(1) and 191(1), dealing with the disqualifications for membership of Parliament and the State legislatures. Patnaik J adopted a highly textualist reading of the provisions, stating that their language made it clear that the disqualifications for sitting legislators and those who planned to contest elections had to be coextensive.<sup>120</sup>

At issue before a three-judge bench of the Supreme Court in the third electoral case <sup>121</sup> was whether the rules governing the casting of 'none-of-the-above' votes, which in effect denied such votes of the benefit of secret ballot, violated the freedom of speech and expression. Sathasivam CJ's opinion was replete with references to the structure and scheme of the Constitution, of which free and fair elections is a cornerstone.<sup>122</sup> He struck down the relevant rules on the basis that the right to cast a 'none-of-the-above' vote—which he mistakenly equated with a negative vote $\frac{123}{2}$ —was an essential part of the right to expression of a voter in a parliamentary democracy, which had to be recognised and given effect in the same manner as the right to cast a regular vote. $\frac{124}{124}$ 

These three decisions produced an internally inconsistent and confusing electoral jurisprudence. On the one hand, the right to vote is a statutory privilege, which can be given and taken away by ordinary legislative majorities. On the other hand, the right to secrecy in voting and the right to cast a negative vote are treated as fundamental rights based on the structure of the Constitution, and are immune from the ordinary political process. Franchise can be denied to a large section of society (as per *Jan Chaukidar*), electoral disqualifications can be imposed liberally—albeit uniformly (as per *Lily Thomas*)—but those who have the vote must be able to cast an anonymous negative vote (à la *People's Union for Civil Liberties*).

In each of the three electoral cases, the Supreme Court ascribed a very specific role to itself—that of an institution which was entrusted with 'cleaning' the political process. This emerges quite clearly from the following observations:

For democracy to survive, it is essential that the best available men should be chosen as people's representatives for proper governance of the country. This can be best achieved through men of high moral and ethical values, who win the elections on a positive vote. Thus in a vibrant democracy, the voter must be given an opportunity to choose none of the above (NOTA) button, which will indeed compel the political parties to nominate a sound candidate. This situation palpably tells us the dire need of negative voting.<sup>125</sup>

So, in order to fit into their version of the Court's decision-making role, three benches of the Supreme Court relied on different interpretive approaches (in two cases, textualism and in the third, structuralism) and produced doctrinally inconsistent jurisprudence. Sophisticated reasoning about the rights issues at stake before the Court, including whether it was proportionate to deny the vote to all prisoners or permissible to distinguish between sitting parliamentarians and future parliamentarians, became the unfortunate casualty of the Court's self-conception.

Two judgments delivered by two-judge benches of the Supreme Court on the rights of sexual

minorities reflect similar concerns. In *Suresh Kumar Koushal v Naz Foundation*, 126 the Court decided an appeal against the Delhi High Court's judgment reading down section 377 of the Indian Penal Code 1860, which criminalised voluntary 'carnal intercourse against the order of nature'. The Delhi High Court's decision<sup>127</sup> rested on the claim that section 377, in the form that it was, violated Articles 14, 15, and 21 of the Constitution, because it discriminated on the ground of sexual orientation, targeted homosexuals as a class, and was contrary to constitutional morality. The Supreme Court reversed the Delhi High Court on the basis that section 377 uniformly regulated sexual conduct and did not, on its face, discriminate against sexual minorities. The Supreme Court also seemed to impose a numerical *de minimis* threshold for the enforcement of fundamental rights through public interest litigation—observing, quite astonishingly, that only a 'miniscule fraction of the country's population' could be classified as lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT).<sup>128</sup>

About four months later, the Supreme Court decided *National Legal Services Authority (NALSA) v Union of India*.<sup>129</sup> The question before it was whether the right to equality required State recognition of *hijras* (broadly, Indian male-to-female transgender groups) and transgenders as a third gender for the purposes of public health, welfare, reservations in education and employment, etc. The two opinions in the case adopted contrasting interpretive techniques to arrive at the conclusion that the Constitution mandated the recognition of a third gender. Radhakrishnan J approached the issue from a textualist perspective, noting that the fundamental rights at issue used the words 'person' or 'citizen', which were gender neutral and applied equally to transgenders.<sup>130</sup> He also contradicted the *de minimis* notion for the enforcement of fundamental rights articulated in *Koushal*. <sup>131</sup> This opinion shows that it is a mistake to conflate textualism with aliberalism—indeed, remarkably liberal judgments may have textualist underpinnings. Sikri J, on the other hand, approached the case from a dynamic, prudential perspective, arguing that the Constitution would need to stimulate changes in social attitudes by requiring the recognition of transgenders as a category separate from males and females. $\frac{132}{132}$  The Constitution, in his view, is a living organism that is sensitive to social realities.

*Koushal* and *NALSA* again show how panel composition in the third phase has produced awkward constitutional jurisprudence. The present state of the law appears to be that although the criminal prohibition on carnal intercourse (including transgender intercourse) is consistent with the fundamental rights to life and equality, the State's failure to recognise a third gender violates those very same rights. Transgenders can putatively claim a violation of constitutional guarantees when they are denied separate public toilets, but cannot do so if they are arrested or questioned for engaging in non penile-vaginal intercourse. Interpretive philosophies also remained quite palpably result oriented. In *Koushal*, the Supreme Court conceived of its role as a majoritarian court that deferred to the democratic will. This conception led the Court to ignore important counter-majoritarian considerations, including section 377's effect on sexual minorities and the cogency of the statutory provision's separate categorisation of 'carnal intercourse against the order of nature'. The Court's formalistic and deferential readings of Articles 14, 15, and 21 stood in contrast with established precedent.

The structuralist approach to interpretation continued to remain popular during this phase. For instance, in 2010, a three-judge bench of the Supreme Court decided the question of whether narcoanalysis, brain mapping, and polygraph tests were contrary to the right against self-incrimination under Article 20(3), which provides that '[n]o person accused of any offence shall be compelled to be a witness against himself'.<sup>133</sup> One of the issues that arose before the Court was what the limits of this constitutional provision were—clearly, not every such test would involve someone who had been

'accused of a criminal offence'. Balakrishnan CJ highlighted the importance of the interrelationship between the right against self-incrimination under Article 20(3) and the right to life under Article 21, affirming that even in cases where a person was not accused of an offence, the guarantees of substantive due process under Article 21 (following *Maneka Gandhi*) would still need to be complied with.<sup>134</sup> The right against self-incrimination was also a component of personal liberty under Article 21, and would come into play when an individual was liable to face non-penal consequences that lay outside the scope of Article  $20(3)$ .  $\frac{135}{2}$  Based on this structuralist reading of the constitutional provisions, the Court held that involuntary administration of narco-analysis, brain mapping, and polygraph tests, whether in the context of a criminal investigation or otherwise, would be unconstitutional.

However, other two-judge or three-judge decisions relied upon a variety of interpretive techniques to read the Constitution, often without any justification. In *Pradeep Chaudhary v Union of India*, 136 the Court was asked to interpret Article 3, which requires the President to consult relevant State legislatures before a bill to alter the boundaries of a State can be introduced in Parliament. There were two options available to the Court. It could either have construed such consultation in a thin sense, requiring the State legislature to be given a formal chance to express its views, or done so in a thick sense, requiring the views expressed by the State legislature to be taken into account, in one way or another, by Parliament. The Court opted for the former, relying upon a textualist reading of Article 3. Sinha J held that consultation in this case would not mean concurrence, and that Parliament would in no way be bound by the views of the State legislature.<sup>137</sup> The Court failed to justify the reason for which 'consultation' would not have the much thicker meaning attributed to it in the context of judicial appointments. In fact, ascribing a thicker meaning based on a structuralist interpretation would have better accorded with the overall scheme of the Constitution, of which federalism is an essential component.<sup>138</sup>

Even during this phase, however, there were some important (and more carefully reasoned) constitutional bench decisions adopting a fusion of different interpretive techniques to read different parts of the Constitution.<sup>139</sup> In *IR Coelho v State of Tamil Nadu*, <sup>140</sup> the Court followed on from the structuralist interpretation of fundamental rights in *Kesavananda, Minerva Mills*, and other cases, holding that the insertion of statutes into the Ninth Schedule to the Constitution (which is meant to immunise legislation from fundamental rights challenges) would nonetheless be subjected to the 'basic structure' doctrine.

Following the Congress Party-led United Progressive Alliance's victory in the national elections of 2004, the President (on the advice of the Union government) removed four State governors from office, who under Article 156(1) of the Constitution held office 'during the pleasure of the President'. A five-judge bench of the Supreme Court was tasked with deciding whether, and in what circumstances, this was permissible.<sup>141</sup> The Court cited Constituent Assembly Debates to arrive at two conclusions: first, that the framers adopted the 'doctrine of pleasure' route (rather than impeachment or inquiry) for the removal of Governors, and second, that it was assumed that withdrawal of pleasure resulting in removal of the Governor would be on valid grounds (though the framers found no need to enumerate them). This historical approach was supplemented by an intratextualist argument, since the Court discerned what the 'pleasure of the President' meant under Article 156, by referring both to offices that are held during pleasure, and offices that are not held during pleasure, in different parts of the Constitution.<sup>142</sup>

The Supreme Court's judgment in *GVK Industries v Income Tax Officer*<sup>143</sup> was distinctive

because it offered a rare glimpse of studied self-assessment by the Court about its interpretive philosophy.<sup>144</sup> At issue before a five-judge bench was whether Parliament had the power to legislate in respect of causes occurring outside India under Article 245, which provides that '[n]o law made by Parliament shall be deemed to be invalid on the ground that it would have extra territorial operation'. Explaining its structuralist interpretive outlook, the Court observed: <sup>145</sup>

[The] Constitution [may be viewed] as [being] composed of constitutional topological spaces ... Within such a constitutional topological space, one would expect each provision therein to be intimately related to, gathering meaning from, and in turn transforming the meaning of, other provisions therein…

This 'topological space' theory was then applied to arrive at the conclusion that Article 245 did not empower Parliament to make laws for any territory outside India, because the other provisions of that topological space referred to laws made 'for the whole or any part of the territory of India' alone. The Court also cited textual  $\frac{146}{6}$  and historical  $\frac{147}{6}$  arguments to confirm its analysis.

Overall, the features of the Supreme Court's interpretive judgments in the third phase are captured by the expression *panchayati* eclecticism: small benches deciding 'big' cases, a lack of emphasis on reason giving, jurisprudentially inconsistent or awkward decisions, and a variety of interpretive techniques—both within and amongst the Court's judgments—that were often instrumental to the Court's self-conception of its role. Some of these features were also conspicuous in an important judgment delivered by the Supreme Court at the time that this chapter was being finalised. The Court —relying on its self-conception as a sentinel of democracy—invoked the basic structure doctrine to strike down a constitutional amendment seeking to revise the judicial appointments process.<sup>148</sup>

## **VI. CONCLUSION**

In many ways, the Indian Supreme Court's approaches to constitutional interpretation have assimilated global interpretive trends. Within most judgments of the Supreme Court, there has not been one interpretive technique, but many, and judges have often relied on the strategy of claiming that all interpretive routes lead to the same destination. Tracking the worldwide move towards the 'judicialisation of politics',  $\frac{149}{149}$  the Supreme Court's shift away from textualism has been accompanied by an increase in judicial power (recall the second and third judge cases) or an expansion of the scope of judicial review (think of *Kesavananda, Maneka Gandhi*, and *Bommai*). <sup>150</sup> The exponential growth of judgments interpreting the Constitution has led to increasingly precedent-laden and doctrine-heavy decisions, that sometimes lose sight of the document that is being interpreted (although this development has been undercut by small-bench, sub-Supreme Court decision making in recent years).

Yet, the Supreme Court's interpretive outlook has been distinctive in many ways, particularly compared to that of the US Supreme Court. Judges have not been tied down to particular philosophies, and have manifested the flexibility to reconsider their interpretive approaches. Khanna J's move from textualism (in *Kesavananda*) to ethicalism (in *ADM Jabalpur*) and Chandrachud J's move from textualism (in *Kesavananda*) to structuralism (in *Minerva Mills*) offer good examples. One of the reasons for this flexibility may be that constitutional interpretation has generally remained a subconscious (and sometimes, even instrumental) enterprise in the Supreme Court. With some notable exceptions (like *GVK Industries*), there has been very little serious self-reflection from the bench about interpretive methodology. Further, unlike in the United States, where the move away from textualism was justified by the *difficulty* of formal amendment, in India, the *ease* of formal amendment prompted the shift towards interpretive approaches that profess fidelity to the structure of the Constitution. Finally, the Supreme Court's unique system of bench composition combined with differing conceptions of its own role have produced an idiosyncratic, result-centric style of constitutional interpretation in recent years—with many small, sub-Supreme Courts adopting inconsistent approaches that produce incoherent jurisprudence.

\* I am grateful to Tarunabh Khaitan, Nick Robinson, and the editors for comments. All errors are mine.

<sup>1</sup> Nick Robinson and others, 'Interpreting the Constitution: Supreme Court Constitutional Benches Since Independence' (2011) 46(9) Economic and Political Weekly 27. However, as I explain later, the Supreme Court has increasingly decided important questions of constitutional interpretation sitting in benches of two or three judges, which means that the total number of *judgments* involving important questions of constitutional interpretation would far exceed this figure.

 $2$  Constitution of India 1950, art 368(2).

 $3$  Constitution of India 1950, art 368(2). Some constitutional provisions (eg, art 2) are unentrenched, and can be amended by a simple parliamentary majority. However, these provisions expressly state that they are not to be considered as 'amendments to the constitution' for the purposes of art 368, the Constitution's amendment clause.

 $4$  At the time of writing, the US Constitution is 227 years old and has been amended twenty-seven times (of these, the first ten amendments are collectively the Bill of Rights and are generally considered part of the moment of constitutional creation). The Indian Constitution is 64 years old and has been amended a hundred times. Of course, the number of amendments is only a partial indicator of the extent of change brought about by the formal amending process. A single formal amendment may effect greater constitutional change than several formal amendments put together.

 $\frac{5}{2}$  The nature of the link between the structure of a court and its interpretive methodology is considered later in the chapter.

 $\frac{6}{5}$  This holds true irrespective of the number of dissents, which means that dissenting opinions are effectively devalued. See Chintan Chandrachud, 'The Supreme Court's Practice of Referring Cases to Larger Benches: A Need for Review' (2010) 1 SCC Journal 37.

<sup>2</sup> Nick Robinson, 'Structure Matters: The Impact of Court Structure on the Indian and US Supreme Courts' (2013) 61 American Journal of Comparative Law 173.

<sup>8</sup> Keith E Whittington, *Constitutional Interpretation: Textual Meaning, Original Intent, and Judicial Review* (University Press of Kansas 1999) 6.

<sup>9</sup> James Allan, 'Constitutional Interpretation v. Statutory Interpretation: Understanding the Attractions of Original Intent' (2000) 6 Legal Theory 109, 120.

 $\frac{10}{10}$  For instance, the composition of municipalities (art 243R) and the appointment of district court judges (art 233). These are matters of detail which one would expect to find in statutes. Contrast this with Britain, where many constitutional matters are found in ordinary statutes. See Tarunabh Khaitan, ' "Constitution" as a Statutory Term' (2013) 129 Law Quarterly Review 589.

 $\frac{11}{1}$  See eg, Constitution of India 1950, art 124(2).

 $\frac{12}{2}$  See eg, Constitution of India, art 56(1).

 $\frac{13}{2}$  However, it is a mistake to assume that courts enjoy (or indeed, should enjoy) exclusive authority to determine the meaning of constitutional provisions. See generally, Mark Tushnet, *Taking the Constitution Away from the Courts* (Princeton University Press 2000).

<span id="page-15-0"></span><sup>14</sup> See Philip Bobbitt, *Constitutional Fate* (Oxford University Press 1982); Philip Bobbitt, *Constitutional Interpretation* (Blackwell 1991).

<span id="page-15-1"></span> $\frac{15}{2}$  Robert Post, 'Theories of Constitutional Interpretation' (1990) 30 Representations 13, 21.

 $\frac{16}{16}$  Aileen Kavanagh, 'Original Intention, Enacted Text and Constitutional Interpretation' (2002) 47 American Journal of Jurisprudence 255, 257.

 $\frac{17}{2}$  Bobbitt (<u>n 14</u>) 7.

<sup>18</sup> Antonin Scalia, *A Matter of Interpretation* (Princeton University Press 1997) 17.

 $\frac{19}{2}$  Bobbitt (n [14\)](#page-15-0) 17.

 $\frac{20}{2}$  Post (n [15\)](#page-15-1) 20.

 $21$  Akhil Reed Amar, 'Intratextualism' (1999) 112 Harvard Law Review 747.

<sup>22</sup> Mark Tushnet, 'The United States: Eclecticism in the Service of Pragmatism' in Jeffrey Goldsworthy (ed) *Interpreting Constitutions: A Comparative Study* (Oxford University Press 2007) 48.