**6**

## **Gross National Happiness?**

Bhutan, the last surviving Buddhist kingdom in the Himalayas, more than any other country in the world epitomizes the myth of Shangri-la. A small country with less than a million people, squeezed between the two most populous countries on Earth which are also regional rivals, Bhutan has managed to retain its distinctive cultural identity. Its landscape is breathtakingly spectacular, with ancient Buddhist monasteries scattered on the mountain tops, and, it was as a commitment to build a nation based on Buddhist spiritual values rather than crass materialism that King Jigme Singye Wangchuk coined the term Gross National Happiness (GNH) in the early 1970s. The country's national anthem, adopted in 1953, was written to sum up the spirit of a society that 'sprung from an aboriginal people and was enriched by Tibetan, Mongol, and Indo-Burman migrants'<sup>1</sup> :

In the Thunder Dragon Kingdom adorned with sandalwood The protector who guards the teachings of the dual systems He, the precious glorious ruler, causes dominions to spread While his unchanging position abides in constancy As the doctrine of the Lord Buddha flourishes May the sun and peace and happiness shine on the people!2

Buddhism has long been the state religion of Bhutan and the 'dual systems' refers to the combination and, until the early twentieth century, division, of civil as well as spiritual rule that throughout history has characterized the country's rather unique governance structure. But behind this romanticized and picturesque facade lies a turbulent past and a precarious present. Following several conflicts between Britain's colonial power in India and the Bhutanese, an agreement was reached in 1910 whereby Bhutan submitted 'to be guided by the advice of the British

Government in regard to its external relations', while the British pledged 'to exercise no interference in the internal administration of Bhutan'.<sup>3</sup> On 8 August 1949, the governments of Bhutan and independent India entered into a similar agreement, which, in effect, reconfirmed Bhutan's status as a nation dependent on India but with a high degree of autonomy. 4

But unlike Sikkim, Bhutan gradually managed to strengthen its independent status. In 1971, after being an observer for three years, Bhutan was admitted to the UN. And, in 2007, a revised treaty was signed, stating that 'the Government of the Kingdom of Bhutan and the Government of the Republic of India shall cooperate closely with each other on issues relating to their national interests. Neither government shall allow the use of its territory for activities harmful to the national security and interests of the other.'<sup>5</sup>

This special relationship between the two countries has made it possible for India to account for 75 per cent of Bhutan's total imports, while 85 per cent of its exports go to India. Bhutan's biggest export consists of hydropower from plants on rivers flowing down the Himalayas, and India is the sole importer. The Bhutanese currency, the Ngultrum, is tied to the Indian Rupee, with which it is on par. Strategically, Bhutan's border with China follows the crest of the mountains, which here and all along the Himalayan range separates the Indian subcontinent from the Tibetan plateau. The 1949 and 2007 treaties make no specific reference to India's defence of Bhutan but, as early as 1958, Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru declared that 'acts of aggression against Bhutan would be taken as acts of aggression against India itself'.<sup>6</sup> The Indian Army maintains a training mission, the Indian Military Training Team (IMTRAT) in Ha district, which is adjacent to the strategically important Chumbi Valley in Tibet, and Bhutanese army officers are sent for training at the National Defence Academy in Pune and the Indian Military Academy in Dehra Dun.

At the same time, Bhutan is the only neighbouring country with which China does not yet have diplomatic relations. But so as not to offend the Chinese, Bhutan remains one of the few Buddhist countries in the world that the Dalai Lama has not visited, although the population there practises a form of Buddhism similar to that of Tibet. Following the 1959 Lhasa uprising, 6,000 Tibetan refugees poured into Bhutan. They were allowed to stay on condition that they did not engage in any political activity. In 1981,

the Tibetans were told to accept Bhutanese citizenship, or leave the country. Most of them left for India.

China has responded to Bhutan's delicate balancing act by deploying its new, post-Mao Zedong strategy in foreign affairs: soft diplomacy. In recent years, Chinese circus artistes, acrobats, and footballers have travelled to Bhutan and a limited number of Bhutanese students have received scholarships to study at universities in China. Tourism has also expanded. A decade ago, only 19 Chinese tourists visited Bhutan. In 2015, the figure was 9,399, or 19 per cent of the total.<sup>7</sup>

Not surprisingly, India is watching these developments with concern. In July 2014, Bhutan became the first international stop for Narendra Modi, two months after he became India's prime minister. Later that year, India's President Pranab Mukherjee visited Bhutan, underscoring the value that New Delhi places on its relations with the small but strategically located Himalayan kingdom. High on the agenda was discussion on China's attempts to gain a permanent presence in Bhutan. Diplomatically, the only contact between China and Bhutan are a series of talks to settle the border between the two countries. Today, China lays claim to two areas of Bhutan, a strip of territory adjacent to the Chumbi Valley and a large area in the north, while a 1961 map produced by Beijing showed larger areas of Bhutan as well as of Nepal and Sikkim as part of China. At one stage, China considered nearly 4,500 square kilometres of land on the northern and western regions of Bhutan to be disputed. In the 1930s, Mao openly declared that 'the correct boundaries of China' would include Bhutan, Myanmar, Nepal, Taiwan, Korea, and the Ryukyu Islands. But those remarks were later deleted from official records so as not to antagonize China's neighbours.<sup>8</sup>

Bhutan, high up in the Himalayas, may be considered an isolated kingdom, but its interaction with the outside world began as early as the seventh century when the Tibetan king Srongtsen Gampo converted to Buddhism and ordered the construction of two temples, one in Bumthang and the other in the Paro Valley. In the eighth century, the Buddhist sage Padmasambhava, who was also known as Guru Rimpoche and sometimes referred to as the Second Buddha, came to Bhutan from India at the invitation of one of the local kings who at that time ruled various parts of the country. Guru Rimpoche then travelled on into Tibet and, on his return

to Bhutan, built new monasteries also in the Paro Valley and in Bumthang, where he set up his headquarters.

Guru Rimpoche is regarded as the founder of the Nyingmapa sect of the tantric Tibetan form of Mahayana Buddhism that spread throughout Bhutan in the eighth century. Nyingmapa is also known as the 'old sect' or the Red Hat sect.<sup>9</sup> But neither today's Bhutan nor Tibet had any properly organized central governments at that time. Local kings ruled different areas and were often at war with one another, and rival sects fought for spiritual supremacy over the subjects. Mongol warriors had also entered the scene and settled in some of the region's most fertile valleys, and, in Tibet, helped the first Dalai Lama gain political power.

By the fourteenth century, the power of the Mongol overlords began to decline, but, after a period of anarchy, the Gelugpa, or the Yellow Hat sect, which the Mongols supported, became the most powerful force in Tibet. As a result, monks of rival sects fled to eastern Tibet and headed south to Bhutan. Some of these monks built the first fortified monasteries, called *dzong*s, that still dot the Bhutanese landscape. Eventually, the practices of a subsect of the Red Hats called Drukpa became the dominant form of religious practice. The Drukpa school emerged as the most powerful force, especially in western Bhutan, and, as Bhutanese historian Karma Phuntsho writes, 'in later times came out victorious to become the ruling power and state religion'.<sup>10</sup>

But still, no reasonably centralized state structure existed until the Drukpa monk Ngawang Namgyel arrived in Bhutan in the early seventeenth century. He had fled the dominance, in Tibet, of the Yellow Hat sect, which was led by the fifth and most powerful Dalai Lama. Ngawang Namgyel assumed the title '*shabdrung*' (at whose feet one submits) and repelled repeated attempts by the Gelugpa rulers of Tibet to conquer his new realm. The most vivid account of the shabdrung's strong personality was compiled by a Jesuit priest from Portugal who met him in 1627. The priest, Estevao Cacella, was accompanied by another Jesuit, Joao Cabral, and these two Portuguese men were the first known Westerners to visit Bhutan. Cacella described the shabdrung as 'both King and highest lama in this kingdom'.<sup>11</sup>

Since the seventeenth century, the country has also been called Druk Yul, the land of the thunder dragon, to emphasize the Drukpa lineage.

Bhutan, or 'Bootan', as it was spelled in the past, is most probably a derivative from the Indian term 'Bhutia' or 'Bhotay' in Nepali, which refers to peoples of Tibetan stock. But the Indo-Aryan term *bhot* could, in turn, be derived from the Tibetan word *bod*, which is what Tibet is called in Tibetan and Bhutanese dialects. The Tibetans call themselves *Bod-pa*, or inhabitant of Tibet.<sup>12</sup>

To strengthen his hold over his Thunder Dragon kingdom, the shabdrung built more and larger dzongs, which became centres of religious as well as secular power—the dual system of governance that is mentioned in modern Bhutan's national anthem and which is followed, at least in theory, even today. The colossal dzongs of Thimphu, Paro, and Punakha trace their origin to the time of the first shabdrung. According to the British historian and Tibetologist Michael Aris,

[e]very *dzong* was divided between an ecclesiastical wing occupied by state monks of the Drukpa school and a civil wing where the business of government was transacted and where the grain tax and other levies raised from the public could be deposited in storerooms13… the effectiveness of his rule was demonstrated before his death by tribute missions from all over the country and by embassies from neighbouring Indian states, Nepal and several Tibetan principalities.14

The head of the civil, but still theocratic, government was a *druk desi* who was either a monk or a layman.

The succession of the shabdrung was supposed to be by reincarnation in the manner of Tibet's Dalai Lama. But when the first shabdrung died in 1651, his importance for the country was so great that his death was concealed for several years under the pretext that he was in a meditation retreat. And when his death became known, the search for a child into whose body he had been reborn began, with rival factions supporting at least five alternative reincarnations. The conflict was eventually settled when, in the 1730s, Bhutan was invaded by a military force from Tibet. According to Aris, this was 'the only successful invasion of Bhutan by Tibet…[but] the campaign was in fact brought to an end more by an appeal for peace issued by the leading Tibetan lamas of the day than by outright conquest.'<sup>15</sup>

The country was divided into two states and both sides appealed to the authorities in Lhasa for mediation. But they also had to submit their case to the Chinese emperor, who claimed sovereignty over Tibet. Emissaries from the two rival camps were sent to the Imperial Court in Beijing in 1734.

Peace was achieved and the country was unified, but, as Aris points out, 'the submission to Chinese mediation entailed a theoretical loss of sovereignty'. At the same time, however, 'it led to the establishment of formal diplomatic relations with Tibet that helped to guarantee the fact of Bhutanese independence'.<sup>16</sup>

And it was not China but Britain that came to play an important role in the subsequent history of Bhutan. It began in the 1770s with the Bhutanese seizing control of the principality of Cooch Behar (now Koch Bihar) in the plains below the Himalayas. To rid the state of the invaders, the ruler of Cooch Behar appealed for help from the British East India Company. About 600 Bhutanese soldiers were killed in the first encounter on 22 December 1772 alone as British forces ousted them from the Cooch Behar fort.17 Britain now replaced Tibet as the major external threat to Bhutan.

Boundary disputes continued to affect relations between the British and the Bhutanese. The British gained control over Assam after a war with the Myanmar kingdom in 1824–6, and proceeded to occupy the remaining Bhutanese-controlled areas in the plains. Several military encounters between British and Bhutanese forces came in the wake of colonial expansion into the Brahmaputra Valley. Bhutanese troops raided Cooch Behar and Sikkim in 1862, by which time the British Crown had taken over control of India from the East India Company. The British counterattacked, and, despite some battlefield victories for the Bhutanese, the conflicts ended with the Treaty of Sinchula, which was signed on 11 November 1865. Bhutan had to give up all claims to the Assam Duars, or foothills, in return for a subsidy of Rs 50,000. Article I of the Treaty also stated that '[t]here shall henceforth be perpetual peace and friendship between the British Government and the Government of Bhootan'.<sup>18</sup>

The loss of the plains dealt a severe blow to the Bhutanese economy and lead to civil strife within what remained of the country. While reincarnations of the shabdrung continued to be the spiritual head of Bhutan, the provinces were ruled by more worldly administrators who bore the title '*penlop*' or '*pönlop*'. The penlop of Tongsa was considered pro-British, while his counterpart in Paro was pro-Tibetan. Towards the end of the nineteenth century, Ugyen Wangchuk, the Tongsa penlop, emerged as the most powerful and managed to defeat his rivals after several civil wars and rebellions.

The British, naturally, welcomed this development, as peace on the Bhutanese border was not their only concern. According to a US government study, the British also wanted to offset potential Russian advances in Lhasa and open trade relations with Tibet. 'Ugyen Wangchuk saw the opportunity to assist the British and in 1903–4 volunteered to accompany a British mission to Lhasa as a mediator.'<sup>19</sup> That mission, of course, was Francis Younghusband's military expedition to Tibet, and for his services in securing the 1904 Anglo-Tibetan Convention, Ugyen Wangchuk was knighted by the British. The penlop of Tongsa became a knight commander of the Indian Empire at a ceremony at Punakha dzong in 1905 attended, apart from local dignitaries, by John Claude White, the political officer of Sikkim.

Ugyen Wangchuk emerged as the most powerful man in Bhutan. The penlop of Paro was removed and replaced by a relative, a member of the likewise pro-British Dorji family. The time had come for Bhutan to be a modern state, and when the then reincarnation of the shabdrung died in 1903 and a new one had not appeared by 1906, Ugyen Wangchuk assumed total control of the country. Although a new, nominal shabdrung was found, or rather two, one for his mind and the other for his body, <sup>20</sup> an assembly of leading monks, government officials, and heads of the country's most important clans and families elected Ugyen Wangchuk to the position of the first *druk gyalpo*, or Thunder Dragon King, of Bhutan. The fiftyseventh and last *druk desi*, or *deb raja* as he was also called, was forced to retire, and a hereditary, absolute monarchy succeeded the old theocracy. The Dorji family became hereditary holders of the position of *gongzim*, or chief chamberlain.<sup>21</sup>

This new system suited the British perfectly. Ugyen Wangchuk had visited Kolkata in 1906, where he met the prince of Wales. The two men met again in Delhi in 1911, when the prince had become King George V and Ugyen Wangchuk the king of Bhutan. This was a year after the signing of the new Anglo-Bhutanese Treaty, which had placed Bhutan's foreign relations under the control of the British Government of India while granting Bhutan internal autonomy. 22

The 1910 treaty was signed and sealed by King Ugyen Wangchuk, Charles Alfred Bell, who was White's successor as political officer of Sikkim, and local Bhutanese administrators. Bell became political officer

for Bhutan and Tibet as well, but continued to reside in Gangtok. Bhutan was left to manage its own internal affairs in a way Sikkim never was.

On the other hand, Britain was concerned about China, as its invading forces in Tibet were drawing close to the frontiers of India. In the 12 November 2016 issue of the *Economic and Political Weekly*, Pradip Phanjoubam wrote a lengthy critique of Neville Maxwell's version of events at the time. Maxwell had written in a previous article in the *Economic and Political Weekly* that a 'premortal, last-gasp expansionary impulse of the Manchu empire' in 1909–10 had driven 'its power closer to India's north-east'<sup>23</sup> . Phanjoubam retorted that not only did China overrun Tibet during that last-gasp impulse, but, 'it also began probing the neighbouring principalities, Nepal, Bhutan, Sikkim, and the unadministered region that the British considered its territory but lying beyond the Inner Line'.<sup>24</sup> The British were not worried about Nepal, which had a robust army, or Sikkim which had become a British protectorate, and not 'the un-administered areas in the north-east for it was unlikely China would covet these wild non-state, non-revenue hills'.<sup>25</sup> A couple of border stones south of Walong were the only signs of Chinese incursions into the northeastern areas.

The British were nevertheless 'extremely anxious about the possible fate of Bhutan', according to Phanjoubam, and hence the 1910 treaty, which formalized Bhutan's relations with British India and ensured that Bhutan would not undertake any foreign policy initiatives on its own. More importantly, the British wanted to pre-empt any attempt by the Chinese to expand their Tibetan conquest into Bhutan. But the collapse of the Imperial Manchu Dynasty during the 1911–12 revolution meant that it never happened. Tibet's role as a buffer between India and Bhutan on one side and China on the other was secured when the Chinese withdrew from the Tibetan highlands, and Lhasa could once again manage its own affairs.

The close relationship with India meant that the reign of the first druk gyalpo saw not only increased trade with the plains below the mountains but also the introduction of Western-style schools and improved internal communications. This development continued under his successor, his son Jigme Wangchuk, who became king in 1926. More schools, dispensaries, and roads were built. Monasteries and local governmental bodies were brought under central, royal control. But there was still a shabdrung, and he challenged, unsuccessfully, Jigme Wangchuk's accession to the throne.

In the spring of 1931, in a vain attempt to restore his powers, the then shabdrung, Jigme Dorji, sent his brother, Ckökyi Gyeltsen, with two servants to meet Mahatma Gandhi in Borsad in Gujarat, India. He was instructed to tell the Mahatma that Bhutan used to be ruled by the shabdrungs, but not anymore. Ckökyi Gyeltsen asked Gandhi for help. But, as Michael Aris points out, 'it is difficult to think of a person more unsuited to joining a plot of this kind than Gandhi'.<sup>26</sup> The shabdrung then began to make plans to go to Tibet and from there if necessary to China. According to Aris, '[t]he Panchen Lama Ckökyi Nyima was at that time expected by some to return from a long exile with the support of a strong contingent of Chinese troops, and the *Shabdrung* hoped now to obtain help in wresting power from the king'.<sup>27</sup>

The druk gyalpo found out about the plot and had the shabdrung detained at Talo monastery in Punakha, where he resided. Then, on 12 November 1931, the shabdrung died. Whether he was killed or committed suicide is unclear, but he was the last shabdrung to be recognized officially. Since then there have been several claimants to the title of shabdrung, but they have all resided in India without any influence in Bhutan.

The first druk gyalpo had, before his death in 1926, sought and received British assurance that his family, the Wangchuks, would retain their prominent position in Bhutan. Thus, a royal lineage was established and the second druk gyalpo, Jigme Wangchuk, reigned unopposed until his death in 1952. He oversaw the transition of Bhutan's relationship with the British colonial power to the new agreement with independent India and personally ratified the 8 August 1949 Treaty of Perpetual Peace and Friendship between the Government of India and the Government of Bhutan. Indians made the same pledges as the British before them—to oversee Bhutan's foreign policy but leave internal governance to the Bhutanese—but some historians now believe that if India had been involved in a conflict with China at that time, as it was a decade later, it might not have agreed so easily to Bhutan's request for continuation of self-determination in its internal affairs.<sup>28</sup>

The third druk gyalpo, Jigme Dorje Wangchuk, was enthroned in 1952 and reigned until his death in 1972, some of the most tumultuous years in Bhutan's modern history. After it invaded Tibet in 1951, China was now a neighbour, and, as a consequence, Bhutan's relations with India grew even stronger. Jigme Dorje Wangchuk encouraged Indian investment in smallscale industry and agriculture, as it became more urgent than previously to speed up the modernization of Bhutan in order to counter Chinese encroachment into Tibet's border regions.

Slavery and serfdom were abolished and the third druk gyalpo also implemented a land reform to ensure more equal distribution of wealth. A 130-member National Assembly was established in 1953 and, in 1958, the position of gongzim, held by the Dorji family, was upgraded to that of *lonchen* (prime minister). The first steps towards a constitutional monarchy had been taken. Communications were also improved to break Bhutan's isolation from the outside world. Funded by India, a road was built in 1962 connecting Phuntsholing on the Indian border with the capital Thimphu. Until then, communications with India had been carried out on the back of yaks and mules. That was how Jawaharlal Nehru, accompanied by his daughter Indira, travelled into Bhutan during their visit to the country in 1958.

Bhutan nevertheless managed to maintain reasonably amiable relations with China—until the Chinese suppression of the 1959 Tibetan uprising. At the same time, enclaves in Tibet over which Bhutan had long exercised quasi-sovereignty, were taken over by the Chinese.<sup>29</sup> Then came the influx of 6,000 Tibetan refugees and the subsequent deterioration of relations between India and China. Bhutan closed its border with Tibet.

During the 1962 war with India, China stated that its troops would not enter Bhutan so long as it 'maintained its neutrality'.<sup>30</sup> Although some Indian troops did retreat from the Tawang area through Bhutanese territory, the Chinese refrained from crossing the border with Bhutan. Were that to happen, the tiny Bhutanese army would not have been able to repel any Chinese attacks, making it imperative for India to help Bhutan strengthen its armed forces and upgrade the roads from the lowlands to the interior.

Despite the progress it had made, Bhutan was still an almost medieval society with little contact with the outside world, except for India. But education came with development and many young Bhutanese attended school in India, primarily in the hill stations of Darjeeling and Kalimpong, but also at the prestigious Doon School in Dehra Dun. One of them was Jigme Palden Dorji of the Dorji family. His younger sister, Ashi Kesang, was married to the third druk gyalpo, Jigme Dorje Wangchuk. So, he was also considered a member of the ruling Wangchuk family.

Jigme Palden Dorji was appointed gongzim in 1952 and, when the title of lonchen was introduced six years later, he became the first to hold that title. He served as prime minister during the 1962 conflict with China and, according to his close friend Nari Rustomji, his most anxious concern at that time was that the Chinese would abduct the latest reincarnation of the shabdrung, then a boy of six residing in a monastery in the Tawang area of NEFA and use him as a puppet to challenge the authority of the druk gyalpo of Bhutan. Jigme Palden Dorji, remaining loyal to the king, told Rustomji that 'the institution of Dharma Raja [shabdrung] as dead as the dodo … and if any young lad was luckless enough to be identified as a potential Dharma Raja, the Bhutanese were adept in fixing an "accident" to hurry him to his Nirvana'.<sup>31</sup>

Rustomji, who was then adviser to the NEFA governor, received urgent appeals from Jigme Palden Dorji to locate the young shabdrung. He was found and brought to Shillong before the Chinese occupied Tawang. The boy was then sent to the Tibetan settlement in McLeodganj to study, where he would be safe under the tutelage of the Dalai Lama. It was never clear whether Jigme Palden Dorji's fears about a Chinese abduction of the shabdrung were real or just something he suspected, and therefore wanted to take precautionary measures against.

In Bhutan, Jigme Palden Dorji was determined to modernize the country, something which the third druk gyalpo was not necessarily opposed to. But he managed to antagonize elements within the clergy by attempting to reduce the power of state-supported religious institutions. As the druk gyalpo grew older, frictions between him and his dynamic prime minister became evident. Jigme Palden Dorji also made enemies within the military over the use of some military vehicles and the forced retirement of about 50 army officers.

All those who opposed modernization, especially the traditionalists, saw an opportunity in the growing conflict between the druk gyalpo and the Dorjis. On 5 April 1964, while the druk gyalpo was undergoing medical treatment in Switzerland, Jigme Palden Dorji was assassinated at Phuntsholing by an army corporal. The country was plunged into its most serious political crisis since the establishment of hereditary monarchy in 1907.

The druk gyalpo was rushed home from Switzerland, and with Indian prompting, the plotters were arrested and tried for treason. Some of them

were executed, including the chief of army operations, Namgyal Bahadur, who happened to be the druk gyalpo's uncle. Others who had taken part in the plot escaped to Nepal. But that was not the end of the turmoil or the perceived power struggle between pro-Wangchuk loyalists and 'modernist' Dorji supporters. And the main issue may not have been an end to or lessening of the power of the monarchy but 'full freedom from Indian interference'.32 Whatever the case, Jigme Palden Dorji's successor as prime minister, his brother Lhendup Dorji, was exiled along with members of his family in 1965. The druk gyalpo himself became prime minister and replaced the Dorji allies with more conservative men. His half-brother, Dasho Wangchuk, was made army commander to ensure the loyalty of the military. But the crisis was not over and in July 1965 there was an assassination attempt against the druk gyalpo himself. The Dorji camp was not implicated in the plot, and the would-be assassins were even pardoned by the druk gyalpo.

Even if some Bhutanese may have been dissatisfied with the heavy dependence on India, there was no way Bhutan could go its own way given the country's strategic importance to the Indians, especially after the 1962 War. In fact, in the words of a now declassified CIA report, 'the period after Jigme's assassination offered enhanced opportunities for the expansion of Indian influence'.<sup>33</sup> The same report states that 'India [now] provides Bhutan with military and intelligence training which is specifically aimed at countering Chinese subversion34…the Chinese…have some means of exploiting Bhutanese religious differences, particularly through the use of friendly Tibetans'.<sup>35</sup>

Efforts were also stepped up to develop Bhutan's economy and to strengthen the role of the monarchy as the pillar of the nation state. During the reign of the third druk gyalpo, Dzongkha, a dialect related to Tibetan, became the official language and Thimphu was made the sole, year-round capital. Punakha had, until 1955, served as the capital and after that as winter capital, while Thimphu, higher up in the mountains, was the summer capital. With the administration centred in Thimphu, the efficiency of the government could be improved.

Bhutan's leaders were also more astute in handling their relations with India than the controversial royal couple in Gangtok. Like Sikkim, Bhutan sought more direct, international links, but did so more discreetly and

without antagonizing India. Without much ado, already in 1962, Bhutan joined the Plan for Cooperative, Economic, and Social Development in Asia and the Pacific, better known as the Colombo Plan. In 1966, the government in Thimphu notified India of its desire to become a member of the UN and, when that was granted in 1971, it was a major foreign policy breakthrough for Bhutan.

The third druk gyalpo, Jigme Dorji Wangchuk, who is seen as the father of modern Bhutan, died on 21 July 1972 while receiving medical treatment in Nairobi, Kenya. He was only 43, but had had a series of health problems and suffered several heart attacks before his death. The first druk gyalpo had adopted a unique symbol of his royal authority: a crown surmounted by the head of a raven, which represented the raven-headed Mahakala, Bhutan's guardian deity. <sup>36</sup> The Raven Crown was now passed on to Jigme Dorji Wangchuk's only son, Jigme Singye Wangchuk, who, on 24 July, became the fourth druk gyalpo. He was only a few months shy of 17 when he became the head of what was then still an absolute monarchy. But the young druk gyalpo was very well educated and more accustomed to the modernities of the outside world than any of his predecessors. After attending St. Joseph's College in Darjeeling, he continued his studies at the Heatherdown Preparatory School in England where, Prince Andrew, Prince Edward, and Britain's future Prime Minister David Cameron studied after him, and, later, at the Ugyen Wangchuk Academy in Paro.

The reign of the fourth druk gyalpo, which lasted until he abdicated in favour of his son Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuk in January 2006, saw rapid economic and social development based on the export of hydroelectric power to India, high-end tourism, and cottage industry. This has enabled Bhutan's government to provide its citizens with free education and health care. A new middle class has emerged and even though farmers remain poor, they are, by and large, self-sufficient and there is no outright misery in the countryside.

The fourth druk gyalpo also introduced a form of democracy and negotiated the 2007 agreement with India, which established Bhutan as a truly independent nation. But it was also a time when relations with Nepal deteriorated over the expulsion of ethnic Nepalese in the early 1990s, when Indian anger grew at the presence of insurgents from northeastern India who trained at camps in southern Bhutan, and when China began to show renewed interest in the Himalayan kingdom.

In the outside world, however, the fourth druk gyalpo became best known for promoting his entirely new development concept, the GNH instead of the Gross National Product (GNP). Along with the GNH came a vigorous campaign to strengthen national identity. Known as *driglam namzha*, it sought to promote the national language, Dzongkha, and citizens of both sexes were instructed to wear Bhutanese national dress rather than western-style clothing.

This was not an easy task, given the fact that Bhutan is actually ethnically very diverse for such a small, sparsely populated country. In broad terms, the population consists of four major ethnic groups, which in turn are made up of several subgroups. The Ngalops are people who migrated to Bhutan as early as the ninth century. The name means 'earliest risen' or 'first converted' and they are related to the Tibetans, embraced Buddhism at early stage in history, and speak Dzongkha as their mother tongue. The Ngalops live in western and northern Bhutan and are the dominant political and cultural group in modern Bhutan.<sup>37</sup>

The Sharchops ('easterners') live mostly, as the name implies, in eastern Bhutan and are of mixed Tibetan and South Asian descent. They are believed to have migrated into Bhutan from Assam or possibly northern Myanmar over the centuries. Because of their proximity to Assam, many of them speak Assamese or even Hindi, apart from their own Tshangla, which, like Dzongkha, is a Tibeto-Burman language. The Sharchops are closely related to the Monpa of the Tawang area across the border in India. Although the Sharchops comprise the biggest single ethnic group in the country, they have become assimilated into the Tibetan-Ngalop culture.

Then there are aboriginal tribal groups living in scattered villages throughout Bhutan. They are mostly Hindu and related to tribal groups in Assam. Some of these groups are considered the most indigenous of Bhutan's various ethnic groups, while others are descendants of slaves who were brought to the country from similar tribal areas in India.

The fourth group consists of people of Nepalese origin. They are called Lhotshampas, meaning 'southerners', and most of them migrated to Bhutan from Nepal and the Darjeeling area in the early twentieth century. They were brought in to cultivate the tiny, and, until then, largely uninhabited, strip of lowland running from east to west between the mountains and the Indian border. Nepalese migrants turned the once inhospitable and malariainfested jungles of southern Bhutan into a thriving agricultural region of

rice fields, vegetable gardens, orange orchards, and cardamom groves. The highlands were supplied with food, and the government could levy badly needed taxes on the industrious migrants. The Lhotshampas are mostly Hindu, and speak Nepali, an Indo-Aryan language, and are quite easily distinguishable from the rest of the population by their South Asian looks. The Lhotshampas, however, did not fit into the new nation that the fourth druk gyalpo was going to build. Many Bhutanese remembered the fate of neighbouring Sikkim, where Nepalese migrants came to outnumber the indigenous Bhutias and Lepchas, and which eventually lost whatever independence it had once had.

The issue was actually not new. As early as 1942, the then British political officer for Sikkim, Bhutan, and Tibet, Sir Basil Gould, had warned the Bhutanese about the potential danger of immigrants taking over the country. The Bhutanese replied that since the settlers were not registered as subjects they would be evicted 'if need arose'.<sup>38</sup> In 1952, a party was formed by Lhotshampas who had left Bhutan and settled in West Bengal and Assam. It was called the Bhutan State Congress (BSC) and advocated the creation of a 'Greater Nepal' encompassing Nepal, Sikkim, northern West Bengal, and Bhutan. Two years later, they made an effort to expand their activities into Bhutan with a satyagraha (an Indian-style nonviolent resistance) in the Bhutanese village of Sarbhang. But few Lhotshampas joined in because they did not want to jeopardize their already tenuous citizenship status. The potential threat that the BSC could pose was neutralized by granting concessions to the Lhotshampas such as representation in the National Assembly.

Bhutan also introduced a Citizenship Act in 1958 to tackle the problem. Amnesty was given to all those who could prove that they had lived in Bhutan for at least 10 years prior to the enactment of the new regulations. Further immigration was also banned, but that became a problem when the highway from Phuntsholing to Thimphu was built in the early 1960s. Bhutan wanted to use a local workforce, while India saw that as impracticable because the country lacked the capacity to supply workers willing to take part in such projects. Unskilled labourers from India, most of them ethnic Nepalese, were brought in and, when the work was over, many of them decided to settle in villages inhabited by their kinsmen in the south.

But the extent of illegal immigration in the south did not become evident until the authorities conducted a nationwide census in 1988. The thought was to enforce the new Citizenship Act, enacted in 1985 and meant to clarify the 1958 Act by stating that only immigrants whose families had settled in Bhutan before 1958 were entitled to citizenship. The operation turned out to be a disaster. First, it was conducted thoroughly only in the south. Secondly, it was discovered that there were many more illegal immigrants than expected all over the southern districts.

The problem was especially evident in the Samtse (previously Samchi) district in southwestern Bhutan, which can be reached by car only from India, as most Bhutanese roads lead from the border with India in south to the Bhutanese interior in the north, with only one major east–west highway through the country. Further, Samtse is adjacent to Kalimpong, one of the worst hit areas of the 1986–8 agitation, which sometimes took a violent turn, for the establishment of an autonomous Nepalese region in northern India to be called Gorkhaland. Not surprisingly, the census showed that the population of Samtse had doubled during the 1980s. According to a brochure published by the Bhutanese government: 'The recently completed cadastral survey of Samchi [Samtse] district [also] revealed that the total illegal landholdings there was 47,235 acres, which is more than the total landholdings in Tashigang, the country's largest district.'<sup>39</sup>

The exact number of ethnic Nepalese residing legally and illegally in the country in the late 1980s is not known, but it could have been as many as 30–40 per cent of the population, then stated at 1.37 million. The response was a campaign to drive out all 'illegal immigrants'. Along with Dzongkha and English, Nepali used to be one of the three official languages of Bhutan taught in the country's schools. But in 1989, Nepali was dropped from school curricula, and ceased to be an official language.

Some Lhotshampas responded in 1990 by forming the Bhutan People's Party (BPP), which resisted the driglam namzha policies and said it was fighting for the rights of the people of the south. The BPP accused the government of arresting, torturing, and murdering many Lhotshampas suspected of indulging in anti-royal activities. In turn, the Bhutanese authorities alleged that the BPP's armed units—and it had some—had burned schools, bombed bridges, and assassinated village headmen and police officers. Between September 1990 and September 1991, more than

2,000 pieces of firearms as well as hand grenades, land mines, and gelatine explosives were seized from rebels in the south.<sup>40</sup>

Regardless of which side was right, the violence led to an exodus of ethnic Nepalese from Bhutan. As many as 100,000 fled. However, India, the only country, apart from China, that shares a border with Bhutan, did not want them: relations with the government of the strategically important Bhutan were more important than concern over the plight of the Lhotshampas. The refugees continued flow into Nepal, where they were housed in a string of refugee camps in Jhapa and Morang near the Indian border in the south. There, some of the Lhotshampas became involved with politicians from Nepal's various communist parties, among them the Maoists. In the early 1970s, Jhapa had been the scene of a Maoist-led uprising similar to that in Naxalbari across the border in India. Inspired by their Nepalese comrades, some Lhotshampas even set up their own Maoist party.

Needless to say, such activities made it impossible for Bhutan to accept what Nepal and many western countries demanded: the right of the Lhotshampas to return to the homes they had left behind. Nor could the Indians ignore the warning signs from the camps in southern Nepal. The CIA had stated as early as 1965 that the separatist activities by the Lhotshampas could create a situation

capable of exploitation by the Chinese, even though they have no direct access to the *duars* [foothills] which are geographically contiguous to India. One access could be through Sikkim, where China is rumoured to have agents. There are also about 1,000 Communist Party of India members most of them Chinese-oriented—in the Darjeeling district of West Bengal who could also be used to infiltrate the *duars* and to encourage subversion.41

There was no way back for the Lhotshampa refugees, and, despite several rounds of talks between Bhutan and Nepal, they were destined to remain in their squalid camps in Jhapa and Morang for many years to come. In Bhutan, those Lhotshampas who remained became careful not to engage in any anti-government activities. They knew the response would be expulsion from the kingdom.

No sooner had the refugee crisis died down than Bhutan was hit by another problem involving its neighbours. In the early 1980s, a student-led popular movement against illegal immigrants, primarily from Bangladesh, swept across Assam. While the movement's more moderate elements ended

up forming a political party to contest state elections, some went underground and resorted to armed struggle for an independent Assam. The United Liberation Front of Asom [Assam] (ULFA), whose ideology was a mixture of Assamese nationalism and left-wing theories, during its heyday in the mid- and late 1980s, had base camps in various parts of Assam as well as a smaller presence across the border in Myanmar, where it cooperated with Naga and Manipuri insurgents who had established strongholds there, beyond the reach of the Indian Army.

Successive Indian Army operations in Assam in the early 1990s, among them Operation Rhino and Operation Bajrang, forced ULFA's armed cadre out of the state. New bases were established in Bangladesh and in southern Bhutan. ULFA shared some of the camps with three other groups of militants from India's northeast: the National Democratic Front of Bodoland and the Bodo Liberation Tigers Force, which were active among the Bodo plain tribals of Assam, and the Kamtapur Liberation Organisation which wanted to carve out a state called Kamtapur comprising areas of northern West Bengal and western Assam or the sensitive 'Siliguri Neck' between Nepal, Bhutan, and Bangladesh.<sup>42</sup> With camps and sanctuaries in Bhutan and Bangladesh, the insurgents had positioned themselves on both sides of 'the neck', posing a powerful threat to India's national security.

Some observers believe that the Bhutanese government 'invited' the militants from India's northeast to help them 'drive out' the Lhotshampas.<sup>43</sup> But there is little evidence to support this allegation. The insurgents actually moved into Bhutan after most of the Lhotshampas had left. The camps were also established in remote, forested areas in the hills above the southern plains where the Lhotshampas lived. A more plausible explanation is that Bhutan lacked the means to drive them out. And some of the tribal people living in the areas where the camps were located were related to those across the border in Assam, which made for a friendly environment for the insurgents.

Naturally, Bhutan came under pressure from India to take action against the intruders. The Bhutanese government tried, on several occasions, to resolve the problem through negotiations with the leaders of the insurgents. When that failed, only the military option remained. The Royal Bhutan Army, which has been trained and to a great extent also equipped by India, moved into action in December 2003. The operation, codenamed 'All Clear', was the Bhutanese army's first engagement in a major military

campaign—and it turned out to be successful. Bhutanese troops seized ULFA's headquarters at Phukatong in Samdrup Jongkhar district on 15 December. The following day, 10 camps were destroyed and scores of insurgents were killed. The Indian Army did not participate directly in the operation, but deployed 12 battalions along the border with Bhutan to prevent the rebels from fleeing south. Indian helicopters also helped evacuate wounded Bhutanese soldiers, and, by the end of December, no insurgents from India's northeast remained in Bhutan.<sup>44</sup>

When Operation All Clear, which in Bhutan is also referred to as 'Operation Flush Out', was over, the Bhutanese had seized large quantities of assault rifles, rocket launchers, and mortars, communication equipment, and thousands of rounds of ammunition. Most of the equipment was made in China, obtained on what is euphemistically called the 'Chinese black arms market', and smuggled from ports in Bangladesh to Bhutan. The camps in Bhutan were lost, but ULFA and some other insurgent groups still had a presence in Bangladesh, which at that time was ruled by the anti-Indian Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP).

A further blow to ULFA came only four months after the loss of its sanctuaries in Bhutan, this time in Bangladesh. ULFA had placed a major order of weapons from its contacts in China, but it was seized when the ship carrying the lethal cargo arrived at port in Chittagong on 2 April. The shipment originated in Hong Kong and, at that point, involved only Chinese weaponry. From Hong Kong, the ship sailed on to Singapore, where more weapons of Israeli and US manufacture were added. According to the well-respected defence journal *Jane's Intelligence Review*: 'The shipment was then transported north through the Strait of Malacca to be transhipped in the Bay of Bengal to two trawlers, the *Kazaddan* and *Amanat*, which ferried the weapons to a jetty on the Karnaphuli river, Chittagong.'<sup>45</sup> The shipment included automatic and semi-automatic rifles, Kalashnikov-type assault rifles, rocket-propelled grenade-launchers, hand grenades, and a large quantity of all kinds of ammunition. The total value of the shipment was estimated at between US\$ 4.5 and 7 million.<sup>46</sup>

It has never been made clear why the shipment was intercepted, but *Jane's Intelligence Review* speculated that, 'following a tip-off understood to have probably come from Indian intelligence sources—the off-loading of the weapons was interrupted in the early hours of April 2 by

the Chittagong Port Police and Bangladesh Rifles. Nine truckloads of munitions were seized, although it is believed that one loaded truck had left the jetty before the arrival of the port police.'<sup>47</sup> There is no question as to who the guns were destined to: the ULFA and the Bodo as well as Naga insurgents in India's northeast.

The new, commercially oriented China may not be interested in exporting revolution to the rest of the world, but the arms trade is a lucrative business, and, as long as there are buyers, well-connected Chinese 'private arms dealers' are willing to sell. While the weapons actually come from Chinese arms manufacturers such as the state-owned North Industries Corporation (NORINCO), deals can be made through front companies in China or, more conveniently, Hong Kong, with its freewheeling economy and well-established financial institutions. Brokers in Thailand's capital, Bangkok, have also been identified as conduits for weapons from several countries, among them China.

ULFA was in serious trouble, and more was to come. The next setback was in November 2009, when Bangladesh's new government led by the Awami League, which, unlike its predecessor the BNP had no interest in supporting the Indian rebels, had ULFA chairman Arabinda Rajkhowa and its deputy commander-in-chief Raju Baruah arrested along with eight other Assamese militants. They were later handed over to India. In September 2010, Rajkumar Meghen, better known as Sana Yaima, leader of Manipur's United National Liberation Front, was arrested in Dhaka and bundled off to India. At about the same time, the main arms procurer of the Naga rebels and a frequent visitor to China, Thailand-based Anthony Shimray, was arrested at Kathmandu airport in Nepal and ended up in Indian custody. 48

The loss of Bhutan and Bangladesh as sanctuaries has left northwestern Myanmar as the only remaining haven for India's northeastern rebels. ULFA and its Naga and Manipuri allies maintain several camps in the mountains north and northwest of Singkaling Hkamti in Myanmar's Sagaing Region. The main camp is at Taka on a western tributary of the River Chindwin, and some weapons from China are still reaching those bases, usually smuggled from Yunnan down to Mandalay and Monywa in central Myanmar, and from there to the Indian border. It is uncertain, however, whether China's security services are directly involved in this traffic, or if the weapons have been obtained on the Chinese black market. In any case, this has always been a grey area. When he is not paying

occasional visits to Taka, ULFA commander-in-chief Paresh Baruah is based in Yunnan.

Baruah's presence in Yunnan and involvement with the 2004 Chittagong shipment, which although done through 'private arms dealers', was of such a quantity that it would have been impossible to conduct without at least the tacit approval of influential people, show that China's security services have not severed links with insurgents of northeastern India, and the relationship clearly goes beyond commercial deals. As long as the Dalai Lama and his Tibetan government in exile are based in India, China is not likely to give up those connections, which could be used simply to annoy India or, more specifically, for maintaining leverage inside India for purposes such as influencing border talks and other bilateral issues.

Bhutan is only a small pawn in this game, but not an unimportant one for China. While Mao Zedong once held that Bhutan should be part of China, Beijing settled for a different approach after Bhutan had joined the UN in 1971. The CIA analysed China's renewed interest in a 1975 report on Chinese-Indian relations. 'Not only was it meant to explore the possibility of increasing Bhutanese restlessness under Indian tutelage, but also to demonstrate, albeit in a low-key way, China's interest in preserving the status of Bhutan as a buffer between China and India.'<sup>49</sup>

Bhutan, along with India, voted in favour of the People's Republic of China taking over the China seat from the Republic of China in the UN in 1971. With Thimphu and Beijing both now having representatives at the UN headquarters in New York, direct contact between the two countries could begin. And the first major event that brought China into the equation with Bhutan was the coronation of Jigme Singye Wangchuk. Although he had been king since 1972, the coronation had to wait for an auspicious date chosen by astrologers. On 2 June 1974, the Raven Crown was bestowed upon the fourth druk gyalpo at a ceremony attended, among other dignitaries, by Ma Muming, chargé d'affaires at the Chinese embassy in New Delhi. Ma's visit was described by China's official news agency Xinhua as 'a new page in the friendly contacts between the two countries'.<sup>50</sup> The Chinese congratulatory message emphasized the 'desire of the Bhutanese government in developing its economy and safeguarding national independence'.<sup>51</sup>

The CIA concluded that 'the Bhutanese, in no position to alienate their big Indian brother, played down their new Chinese connection very lightly. The Indians, while disgruntled at the Bhutanese invitation to the Chinese, apparently believed that their hold on the small mountain kingdom—which includes responsibility for defence—was secure enough to let the incident pass.'<sup>52</sup>

In 1983, Chinese Foreign Minister Wu Xueqian and his Bhutanese counterpart Lyonpo Dawa Tsering met at the UN headquarters in New York for the first time. In April the following year, the first round of border talks between China and Bhutan was held in Beijing. The Chinese delegation was led by Vice-Foreign-Minister Gong Dafet and the Bhutanese by their ambassador to India, Dasho Om Pradhan. The two sides signed a joint communiqué on 20 April, 'expressing satisfaction with the first round of talks'.<sup>53</sup>

Since then, altogether 24 such talks have been held, but progress has been slow. China still claims parts of Bhutan and, in the 1990s, was carrying out road construction projects and logging in the disputed areas. Bhutan protested, but in December 1998, Bhutan and China signed an Agreement on Maintenance of Peace and Tranquillity in Bhutan-China Border Areas, which stated that China reaffirms that 'it completely respects the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bhutan'.<sup>54</sup>

The Chinese position on the border with Bhutan could be seen as an inadvertent recognition of the McMahon Line, as Bhutan is located south of the watershed at the crest of the Himalayas. But since the Sino-Bhutanese border has not been properly demarcated, the Chinese can always claim that the issue has not yet been settled. More importantly, one inconclusive round of border talks after another serves China's interest of improving its relations with Bhutan, which inevitably would be at India's expense. After the twenty-fourth round of talks in August 2016, the Chinese foreign ministry issued a statement saying that, 'although Bhutan and China have not established diplomatic relations yet, it will not hold back the mutually beneficial cooperation between the two countries. The Bhutanese side is willing to continue to deepen exchanges in such fields as tourism, religion, culture and agriculture to further lift cooperation with China.'<sup>55</sup>

China must also have been pleased with the Bhutanese decision not to allow the Dalai Lama into their country, though they did not do this to appease the Chinese. It has to be remembered that although both Bhutan and Tibet practise a similar form of Buddhism, the people of the two countries belong to different, and in many senses rival, schools of the Mahayana version of the religion. Most Tibetans who accepted Bhutanese citizenship did not pose any challenge to the established religious and political order, but a plot to assassinate the fourth druk gyalpo and burn down the Tashichhodzong in Thimphu was revealed in June 1974. It allegedly involved a number of Tibetan refugees and a Tibetan in Darjeeling.<sup>56</sup> Although there is nothing to implicate the Dalai Lama in the conspiracy, the plotters belonged to the Gelugpa sect and were therefore more loyal to him than to the Bhutanese monarch. While some of the conspirators managed to escape to India, about two dozen people were arrested and later pardoned. Whatever reasons were behind the plot, it underscores the fact that that the Bhutanese and the Tibetans are not natural allies against China.

As China's soft diplomacy continues, New Delhi remains concerned, but during the reign of the fourth druk gyalpo, Bhutan has regained its internal stability and also widened its areas of diplomatic contact to include smaller and medium-sized countries so as not to upset its relations with India. Apart from India, only Bangladesh and Kuwait have full diplomatic representation in Thimphu, but close ties have been established with countries such as Switzerland, Denmark, and Sweden. There is also a Bhutanese embassy in Bangkok, a favourite destination for many Bhutanese who want to send their children to be educated, or shop.

The Dorjis and the Wangchuks appear to have reconciled their differences, and even the descendants of the shabdrung have been included in the new order. At a mass ceremony on 31 October 1988, the fourth druk gyalpo wedded four sisters aged between 23 and 28, nine years after he had married them in private. The young women were daughters of Yab Ugyen Dorji, a descendant of both the mind and speech incarnations of the first shabdrung, Ngawang Namgyal. Yab Ugyen Dorji is the nephew of Jigme Dorji, who died under mysterious circumstances in 1931.

The official version of the fourth druk gyalpo's marriage was that it had been prophesied to him that he would marry four sisters, descendants of the first shabdrung, and he went through with it to go along with the prophecy.

A more plausible explanation is that it was meant to neutralize any followers the shabdrung might still have. By marrying all four sisters, any kind of palace intrigues where one faction could use one daughter against another were also thwarted.

In a surprisingly candid book about the life of her father, one of the four queens, Ashi Dorji Wangmo Wangchuk, describes in detail how Jigme Dorji, her granduncle was, in fact, murdered. Three men entered his bedchamber, where 'they pinned him down, grabbed his throat and kicked him in the scrotum. Shabdrung struggled till the silken scarf stuffed down his throat suffocated him.'<sup>57</sup> Such a revelation would have been unthinkable only a generation ago, but Bhutan today is a different country from the medieval kingdom it used to be. It has entered the modern world with high educational standards, good roads that criss-cross the country; and, in June 1999 television and the internet were introduced to reflect 'the level of progress Bhutan has achieved in recent years', as the fourth druk gyalpo said at the time.<sup>58</sup> The launch coincided with the silver jubilee of his coronation, emphasizing the strong position that the monarchy has retained throughout all the economic and social changes the country has undergone over the last few decades.

A new constitution was presented in 2005, paving the way for elections and a more democratic system. Bhutan was about to become a constitutional monarchy with the monarch remaining an influential figure and, as Article 2 of the constitution states, the 'symbol of unity of the Kingdom and of the people of Bhutan'.<sup>59</sup> At this time, the fourth druk gyalpo announced that he was going to abdicate in favour of his eldest son, Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuk, whose mother was the second youngest of the four sisters. On 9 December 2006, he succeeded his father and, on November 2008, the coronation of the fifth druk gyalpo took place at a colourful ceremony at Thimphu's Tashichhodzong. The new monarch had received his education in the United States, Britain, and India. Born in 1980, he belongs to a new generation of Bhutanese to whom the medieval past is distant history.

Yet, some of the old issues remain. The Lhotshampas who have remained in the country seem to have adapted to the new order so as not to jeopardize their citizenship status, and few remain in the camps in Nepal, as foreign countries have accepted them for resettlement. The United States has taken most of them—and, hardly by coincidence, after the 11

September 2001 terrorist attacks in New York and Washington. The US has laws requiring it to take between 60,000 and 70,000 refugees per year, but for several years after '9/11' that quota was never filled. The US had to look for 'suitable refugee populations', as a US government official said in a private conversation, which meant, not Muslim.<sup>60</sup> The choice fell on the Karen refugees from Myanmar in camps in Thailand, who are mostly Christian and Hindu Lhotshampas of Nepalese origin from Bhutan. This was never an official policy, but the fact that more than 80,000 Bhutanese Nepalese have been resettled in the US lends credence to the assumption that the choice was based on a desire to keep Muslim immigration to the US at minimum levels.

But other illegal immigration remains a problem. The English-language newspaper *Kuensel* reported on 10 June 2016, 'The rising number of illegal immigrants is a huge concern and rising threat to the safety and security of the country according to the National Council's legislative committee's report on illegal immigration presented to the house today'.<sup>61</sup> The 'illegal immigrants' are mostly Indian women working as housemaids in border towns and construction workers from India, some employed by IMTRAT (Indian Military Training Team) and DANTAK, the entity under India's Border Roads Organisation, which builds roads in Bhutan.

Thus, Bhutan's relationship with India is not without problems. While Bhutan is worried about illegal immigration, India sees China's charm offensive as the main concern, especially as the new, 2007, treaty between India and Bhutan gives the latter more independence than before. But India is not likely to act unless Chinese influence goes beyond what it sees as acceptable levels—and that did happen when, in June 2017, Chinese troops with earthmoving equipment entered the Doklam Plateau, an area claimed by both Bhutan and China near the Sikkim-Tibet-Bhutan border junction. The Chinese were going to build roads across Doklam, which they call Donglang and claim as theirs, but, inevitably, the move into this sensitive border area was perceived by India as a clear provocation. On 18 June, Indian troops entered the disputed area to prevent the road construction and, two days later, the government of Bhutan issued a formal diplomatic démarche to Beijing via the Chinese embassy in New Delhi, protesting China's incursion.

On 29 June, Bhutan protested again to the Chinese government, which on the same day released a map depicting the plateau as part of China. As

evidence to support their claim, the Chinese referred to a border treaty signed by the Chinese and the British in 1890, which they claimed had been recognized by Jawaharlal Nehru. But that treaty defined only the northern part of the Sikkim-Tibet border, not the Sikkim-Tibet-Bhutan triborder junction.<sup>62</sup> Meanwhile, India moved troops into Sikkim to strengthen its defences in the general border area. The stand-off heightened tensions along the border to a level not seen since the 1962 War.

Manu Balachandaran and Harish C. Menon, two Indian writers, wrote in an article on the website *Quartz India* that the issue was more than just a localized border dispute. 'China is testing the India-Bhutan relationship', they argued. 'If and when India falters, China will be waiting with open arms to take Bhutan into its fold, especially since the tiny country is now pursuing an independent foreign policy after decades of outsourcing it to India.'<sup>63</sup>

Bhutan was caught in a dilemma. On the one hand, relations with India are crucial for the country's economy, foreign trade, and defence, but, on the other, Thimphu cannot afford to antagonize its powerful northern neighbour. On 1 August, Bhutan's ambassador to India, Vetsop Namgyel, surprised the diplomatic community in New Delhi by attending a function at the Chinese embassy in the Indian capital to mark the 90th anniversary of the founding of the People's Liberation Army. His appearance at the event was highly remarkable, as Bhutan and China do not have diplomatic relations. But, as a commentator in a regional publication wrote at the time, it should be seen 'a subtle signal of Bhutanese goodwill to China'.<sup>64</sup>

The crisis was eventually resolved at the end of August, but India and China announced their respective decisions to withdraw troops from the Doklam Plateau in vastly different ways. In a statement on 28 August, India's Ministry of External Affairs said the 'expeditious disengagement of border personnel at the face-off site at Doklam has been agreed to and is ongoing'.<sup>65</sup> On the other hand, Xinhua, China's official news agency, announced that India had withdrawn its personnel and equipment 'that had crossed the border back to the Indian side ... Chinese personnel verified this at the scene [and] China will continue to exercise its sovereign rights and preserve its territorial sovereignty in accordance with historical border agreements.'<sup>66</sup>

Bhutan's attempts to strike a balance between its traditional friendship with India and China's attempts to gain more influence in the kingdom will be a major challenge for years to come. It remains to be seen how this is going to affect its internal stability, but, so far, Bhutan has continued to do well when it comes to social and economic progress. 'Gross National Happiness' may be a conveniently trite description of Bhutan's development model. Nevertheless, Bhutan has developed into a relatively prosperous welfare state, and, apart from China, the Himalayan kingdom is India's only stable neighbour. Pakistani politics is chaotic and often violent; constant mood swings among the public and power struggles within the elite make the future of Bangladesh unpredictable; Sri Lanka remains a wild card despite the end of Tamil insurrection in 2009; Myanmar is torn apart by civil war and ethnic conflicts; and Nepal is going from one political crisis to another. With China becoming an authoritarian-ruled but freewheeling capitalist society, most people in the world probably thought that orthodox Maoism was dead. That was until it resurfaced with a ferocity that few had predicted in Nepal in the 1990s.