# **Option Pricing Theory: Historical Perspectives**

This article traces the history of the option pricing theory from the turn of the twentieth century to the present. This history documents and clarifies the origins of the key contributions (authors and papers) to the theory of option pricing and hedging. Contributions with respect to the empirical understanding of the theories are not discussed, except implicitly, because the usefulness and longevity of any model is based on its empirical validity.

It is widely agreed that the modern theory of option pricing began in 1973 with the publication of the Black–Scholes–Merton model [12, 104]. Except for the early years (pre-1973), this history is restricted to papers that use the no arbitrage and complete markets technology to price options. Equilibrium option pricing models are not discussed herein. In particular, this excludes the consideration of option pricing in incomplete markets. An outline for this article is as follows. The following section discusses the early years of option pricing (pre-1973). The remaining sections deal with 1973 to the present: the section "Equity Derivatives" discusses the Black–Scholes–Merton model; the section "Interest Rate Derivatives" concerns the Heath–Jarrow–Morton model; and the section "Credit Derivatives" corresponds to credit risk derivative pricing models.

## **Early Option Pricing Literature (Pre-1973)**

Interestingly, many of the basic insights of option pricing originated in the early years, that is, pre-1973. It all began at the turn of the century in 1900 with Bachelier's [4] derivation of an option pricing formula in his doctoral dissertation on the theory of speculation at France's Sorbonne University. Although remarkably close to the Black–Scholes–Merton model, Bachelier's formula was flawed because he used normally distributed stock prices that violated limited liability. More than half a century later, Paul Samuelson read Bachelier's dissertation, recognized this flaw, and fixed it by using geometric Brownian motion instead in his work on warrant pricing [117]. Samuelson derived valuation formulas for both European and American options, coining these terms in the process.

Samuelson's derivation was almost identical to that used nearly a decade later to derive the Black–Scholes–Merton formula, except that instead of invoking the no arbitrage principle to derive the valuation formula, Samuelson postulated the condition that the discounted option's payoffs follow a martingale (see [117], p. 19). Furthermore, it is also interesting to note that, in the appendix to this article, Samuelson and McKean determined the price of an American option by observing the correspondence between an American option's valuation and the free boundary problem for the heat equation.

A few years later, instead of invoking the postulate that discounted option payoffs follow a martingale, Samuelson and Merton [118] derived this condition as an implication of a utility maximizing investor's behavior. In this article, they also showed that the option's price could be viewed as its discounted expected value, where instead of using the actual probabilities to compute the expectation, one employs utility or risk-adjusted probabilities (see expression (20) on page 26). These risk-adjusted probabilities are now known as "risk-neutral" or "equivalent martingale" probabilities. Contrary to a widely held belief, the use of "equivalent martingale probabilities" in option pricing theory predated the paper by Cox and Ross [36] by nearly 10 years (Merton (footnote 5 p. 218, [107]) points out that Samuelson knew this fact as early as 1953).

Unfortunately, these early option pricing formulas depended on the expected return on the stock, or equivalently, the stock's risk premium. This dependency made the formulas difficult to estimate and to use. The reason for this difficulty is that the empirical finance literature has documented that the stock's risk premium is nonstationary. It varies across time according to both changing tastes and changing economic fundamentals. This nonstationarity makes both the modeling of risk premium and their estimation problematic. Indeed, at present, there is still no generally accepted model for an asset's risk premium that is consistent with historical data (see [32], Part IV for a review).

Perhaps the most important criticism of this early approach to option pricing is that it did not invoke the riskless hedging argument in conjunction with the noarbitrage principle to price an option. (The first use of riskless hedging with no arbitrage to prove a pricing relationship between financial securities can be found in [110].) And, as such, these valuation formulas provided no insights into how to hedge an option using the underlying stock and riskless borrowing. It can be argued that the idea of hedging an option is the single most important insight of modern option pricing theory. The use of the no arbitrage hedging argument to price an option can be traced to the seminal papers by Black and Scholes [12] and Merton [104], although the no arbitrage hedging argument itself has been attributed to Merton (see [79] in this regard).

## **Equity Derivatives**

Fischer Black, Myron Scholes, and Robert Merton pioneered the modern theory of option pricing with the publication of the Black–Scholes–Merton option pricing model [12, 104] in 1973. The original Black–Scholes–Merton model is based on five assumptions: (i) competitive markets, (ii) frictionless markets, (iii) geometric Brownian motion, (iv) deterministic interest rates, and (v) no credit risk. For the purposes of this section, the defining characteristics of this model are the assumptions of deterministic interest rates and no credit risk.

The original derivation followed an economic hedging argument. The hedging argument involves holding simultaneous and offsetting positions in a stock and option that generates an instantaneous riskless position. This, in turn, implies a partial differential equation (pde.) for the option's value that is subject to a set of boundary conditions. The solution under geometric Brownian motion is the Black–Scholes formula.

It was not until six years later that the martingale pricing technology was introduced by Harrison and Kreps [65] and Harrison and Pliska [66, 67], providing an alternative derivation of the Black–Scholes–Merton model. These papers, and later refinements by Delbaen and Schachermayer [40, 41, 42], introduced the first and second fundamental theorems of asset pricing, thereby providing the rigorous foundations to option pricing theory.

Roughly speaking, the first fundamental theorem of asset pricing states that no arbitrage is equivalent to the existence of an equivalent martingale probability measure, that is, a probability measure that makes the discounted stock price process a martingale. The second fundamental theorem of asset pricing states that the market is complete if and only if the equivalent martingale measure is unique. A complete market is one in which any derivative security's payoffs can be generated by a dynamic trading strategy in the stock and riskless asset. These two theorems enabled the full fledged use of stochastic calculus for option pricing theory. A review and summary of these results can be found in [43].

At the beginning, this alternative and more formal approach to option pricing theory was viewed as only of tangential interest. Indeed, all existing option pricing theorems could be derived without this technology and only using the more intuitive economic hedging argument. It was not until the Heath–Jarrow–Morton (HJM) model [70] was developed—circulating as a working paper in 1987—that this impression changed. The HJM model was the first significant application that could not be derived without the use of the martingale pricing technology. More discussion relating to the HJM model is contained in the section "Interest Rate Derivatives".

#### *Extensions*

The original Black–Scholes–Merton model is based on the following five assumptions: (i) competitive markets, (ii) frictionless markets, (iii) geometric Brownian motion, (iv) deterministic interest rates, and (v) no credit risk. The first two assumptions —competitive and frictionless markets —are the mainstay of finance. Competitive markets means that all traders act as price takers, believing their trades have no impact on the market price. Frictionless markets imply that there are no transaction costs nor trade restrictions, for example, no short sale constraints. Geometric Brownian motion implies that the stock price is lognormally distributed with a constant volatility. Deterministic interest rates are selfexplanatory. No credit risk means that the investors (all counterparties) who trade financial securities will not default on their obligations.

Extensions of the Black–Scholes–Merton model that relaxed assumptions (i)– (iii) quickly flourished. Significant papers relaxing the geometric Brownian motion assumption include those by Merton [106] and Cox and Ross [36], who studied jump and jump-diffusion processes. Merton's paper [106] also included the insight that if unhedgeable jump risk is diversifiable, then it carries no risk premium. Under this assumption, one can value jump risk using the statistical probability measure, enabling the simple pricing of options in an incomplete market. This insight was subsequently invoked in the context of stochastic volatility option pricing and in the context of pricing credit risk derivatives.

Merton [104], Cox [34] and Cox and Ross [36] were among the first to study stochastic volatility option pricing in a complete market. Option pricing with stochastic volatility in incomplete markets was subsequently studied by Hull and White [73] and Heston [71]. More recent developments in this line of research use a HJM [70] type model with a term structure of forward volatilities (see [51, 52]). Stochastic volatility models are of considerable current interest in the pricing of volatility swaps, variance swaps, and options on variance swaps.

A new class of Levy processes was introduced by Madan and Milne [102] into option pricing and generalized by Carr *et al.* [20]. Levy processes have the nice property that their characteristic function is known, and it can be shown that an option's price can be represented in terms of the stock price's characteristic function. This leads to some alternative numerical procedures for computing option values using fast Fourier transforms (see [23]). For a survey of the use of Levy processes in option pricing, see [33].

The relaxation of the frictionless market assumption has received less attention in the literature. The inclusion of transaction costs into option pricing was originally studied by Leland [99], while Heath and Jarrow [69] studied the imposition of margin requirements. A more recent investigation into the impact of transaction costs on option pricing, using the martingale pricing technology, can be found in [26].

The relaxation of the competitive market assumption was first studied by Jarrow [77, 78] *via* the consideration of a large trader whose trades change the price. Jarrow's approach maintains the no arbitrage assumption, or in this context, a no market manipulation assumption (see also [5]).

In between a market with competitive traders and a market with a large trader is a market where traders have only a temporary impact on the market price. That is, purchase/sales change the price paid/received depending upon a given supply curve. Traders act as price takers with respect to the supply curve. Such a price impact is called *liquidity risk*. Liquidity risk, of this type, can be considered as an endogenous transaction cost. This extension is studied in [26]. Liquidity risk is currently a hot research topic in option pricing theory.

The Black–Scholes–Merton model has been applied to foreign currency options (see [58]) and to all types of exotic options on both equities and foreign currencies. A complete reference for exotic options is [44].

#### *Computations*

The original derivation of the Black–Scholes– Merton model yields an option's value satisfying a pde. subject to a set of boundary conditions. For a European call or put option, under geometric Brownian motion, the pde. has an analytic solution. For American options under geometric Brownian motion, analytic solutions are not available for puts independent of dividend payments on the underlying stock, and for American calls with dividends. For different stock price processes, analytic solutions are often not available as well, even for European options. In these cases, numerical solutions are needed. The first numerical approaches employed in this regard were finite difference methods (see [15, 16]).

Closely related, but containing more economic intuition, option prices can also be computed numerically by using a binomial approximation. The first users in this regard were Sharpe [122] chapter 16, and Rendleman and Bartter [113]. Cox *et al.* [37] published the definitive paper documenting the binomial model and its convergence to the continuous time limit (see also [68]). A related paper on convergence of discrete time models to continuous time models is that by Duffie and Protter [48].

The binomial pricing model, as it is now known, is also an extremely useful pedagogical device for explaining option pricing theory. This is true because the binomial model uses only discrete time mathematics. As such, it is usually the first model presented in standard option pricing textbooks. It is interesting to note that both the first two textbooks on option pricing utilized the binomial model in this fashion (see [38] and [84]).

Another technique for computing option values is to use a series expansions (see [50, 83 and 123]). Series expansions are also useful for hedging exotic options that employ only static hedge positions with plain vanilla options (see [38] chapter 7.2, [24, 63, and 116]).

As computing a European option's price is equivalent to computing an expectation, an alternative approach to either finite difference methods or the binomial model is Monte Carlo simulation. The paper that introduced this technique to option pricing is by Boyle [13]. This technique has become very popular because of its simplicity and its ability to handle high-dimensional problems (greater than three dimensions). This technique has also recently been extended to pricing American options. Important contributions in this regard are by Longstaff and Schwartz [101] and Broadie and Glasserman [18]. For a complete reference on Monte Carlo techniques, see [61].

Following the publication of Merton's original paper [104], which contained an analytic solution for a perpetual American put option, much energy has been expended in the search for analytic solutions for both American puts and calls with finite maturities. For the American call, with a finite number of known dividends, a solution was provided by Roll [115]. For American puts, breaking the maturity of the option into a finite number of discrete intervals, the compound option pricing technique is applicable, (see [60] and [93]). More recently, the decomposition of American options into a European option and an early exercise premium was discovered by Carr *et al.* [22], Kim [96], and Jacka [75].

These computational procedures are more generally applicable to all derivative pricing models, including those discussed in the next two sections.

## **Interest Rate Derivatives**

Interest rate derivative pricing models provided the next major advance in option pricing theory. Recall that a defining characteristic of the Black–Scholes–Merton model is that it assumes deterministic interest rates. This assumption limits its usefulness in two ways. First, it cannot be used for long-dated contracts. Indeed, for long-dated contracts (greater than a year or two), interest rates cannot be approximated as being deterministic. Second, for short-dated contracts, if the underlying asset's price process is highly correlated with interest rate movements, then interest rate risk will affect hedging, and therefore valuation. The extreme cases, of course, are interest rate derivatives where the underlyings are the interest rates themselves.

During the late 1970s and 1980s, interest rates were large and volatile, relative to historical norms. New interest rate risk management tools were needed because the Black–Scholes–Merton model was not useful in this regard. In response, a class of interest rate pricing models were developed by Vasicek [124], Brennan and Schwartz [17], and Cox *et al.* (CIR) [35]. This class, called the *spot rate models*, had two limitations. First, they depended on the market price(s) of interest rate risk, or equivalently, the expected return on default free bonds. This dependence, just as with the option pricing models pre-Black–Scholes–Merton, made their implementation problematic. Second, these models could not easily match the initial yield curve. This calibration is essential for the accurate pricing and hedging of interest rate derivatives because any discrepancies in yield curve matching may indicate "false" arbitrage opportunities in the priced derivatives.

To address these problems, Ho and Lee [72] applied the binomial model to interest rate derivatives with a twist. Instead of imposing an evolution on the spot rate, they had the zero coupon bond price curve that evolved in a binomial tree. Motivated by this paper, Heath–Jarrow–Morton [70] generalized this idea in the context of a continuous time and multifactor model to price interest rate derivatives. The key step in the derivation of the HJM model was determined as the necessary and sufficient conditions for an arbitrage free evolution of the term structure of interest rates.

The defining characteristic of the HJM model is that there is a continuum of underlying assets, a term structure, whose correlated evolution needs to be considered when pricing and hedging options. For interest rate derivatives, this term structure is the term structure of interest rates. To be specific, it is the term structure of default free interest rates. But there are other term structures of relevance, including foreign interest rates, commodity futures prices, convenience yields on commodities, and equity forward volatilities. These alternative applications are discussed later in this section.

To simplify the mathematics, HJM focused on forward rates instead of zero-coupon bond prices. The martingale pricing technology was the tool used to obtain the desired conditions —the "HJM drift conditions". Given the HJM drift conditions and the fact that the interest rate derivative market is complete in the HJM model, standard techniques are then applied to price interest rate derivatives.

The HJM model is very general: all previous spot rate models are special cases. In fact, the labels Vasicek, extended Vasicek (or sometimes Hull and White [74]), and CIR are now exclusively used to identify subclasses of the HJM model. Subclasses are uniquely identified by a particular volatility structure for the evolution of forward rate curve. For example, the Ho and Lee model is now identified as a single factor HJM model, where the forward rate volatility is a constant across maturities. This can be shown to be the term structure evolution to which the Ho and Lee binomial model converges.

Adoption of the HJM model was slow at first, hampered mostly by computational concerns, but as these computational concerns dissipated, the modern era for pricing interest rate derivatives was born. As mentioned previously, the HJM model was very general. In its most unrestricted form, the evolution of the term structure of interest rates could be path dependent (non-Markov) and it could generate negative interest rates with positive probability. Research into the HJM model proceeded in two directions: (i) investigations into the abstract mathematical structure of HJM models and (ii) studying subclasses that had nice analytic and computational properties for applications.

With respect to the understanding of the mathematical structure of HJM models, three questions arose. First, what structures would guarantee interest rates that remained positive? Second, given an initial forward rate curve and its evolution, what is the class of forward rate curves that can be generated by all possible evolutions? Third, under what conditions is an HJM model a finite dimensional Markov process? The first question was answered by Flesaker and Hughston [55], Rogers [114], and Jin and Glasserman [91]. The second was solved by Bjork and Christensen [7] and Filipovic [56]. The third was studied by Cheyette [30], Caverhill [25], Jeffrey [92], Duffie and Kan [45], and Bjork and Svensson [9], among others.

The original HJM model had the term structure of interest rates generated by a finite number of Brownian motions. Extensions include (i) jump processes (see [8, 53 and 82]); (ii) stochastic volatilities (see [1, 31]); and (iii) random fields (see [64, 95]).

#### *Subclasses*

Subsequent research developed special cases of the HJM model that have nice analytic and computational properties for implementation. Perhaps the most useful class, for its analytic properties, is the affine model of Duffie and Kan [45] and Dai and Singleton [39]. The class of models is called *affine* because the spot rate can be written as an affine function of a given set of state variables. The affine class includes both the Vasicek and CIR models as mentioned earlier. This class of term structure evolutions have known characteristic functions for the spot rate, which enables numerical computations for various interest rate derivatives (see [47]). Extensions of the affine class include those by Filipovic [57], Chen *et al.* [28], and Cheng and Scaillet [29].

The original HJM paper showed that instantaneous forward rates being lognormally distributed is inconsistent with no arbitrage. Hence, geometric Brownian motion was excluded as an acceptable forward rate process. This was unfortunate because it implies that caplets, options on forward rates, will not satisfy Black's formula [10]. And historically, because of the industry's familiarity with the Black–Scholes formula (a close relative of Black's formula), Black's formula was used extensively to value caplets. This inconsistency between theory and practice lead to a search for a theoretical justification for using Black's formula with caplets.

This problem was resolved by Sandmann *et al.* [119], Miltersen *et al.* [109], and Brace *et al.* [14]. The solution was to use a simple interest rate, compounded discretely, for the London Interbank Offer Rate (LIBOR). Of course, simple rates better match practice. And it was shown that the evolution of a simple LIBOR could evolve as a geometric Brownian motion in an arbitrage free setting. Subsequently, the lognormal evolution has been extended to jump diffusions (see [62]), Levy processes (see [54]), and stochastic volatilities (see [1]).

Key to the use of the "LIBOR model", as it has become known, is the forward price martingale measure. The forward price martingale measure is an equivalent probability measure that makes asset payoffs at some future date T martingales when discounted by the T maturity zero coupon bond price. The forward price martingale measure was first discovered by Jarrow [76] and later independently discovered by Geman [59] (see [112] for a discussion of the LIBOR model and its history).

#### *Applications*

The HJM model has been extended to multiple term structures and applied to foreign currency derivatives [2], to equities and commodities [3], and to Treasury inflation protected bonds [89]. The HJM model has also been applied to term structures of futures prices (see [21], and [108]), term structures of convenience yields [111], term structures of credit risky bonds (discussed in the next section), and term structures of equity forward volatilities ([51, 52], and [121]). In fact, it can be shown that almost all option pricing applications can be viewed as special cases of a multiple term structure HJM model (see [88]). A summary of many of these applications can be found in [19].

## **Credit Derivatives**

The previously discussed models excluded the consideration of default when trading financial securities. The first model for studying credit risk, called the *structural approach*, was introduced by Merton [105]. Credit risk, although always an important consideration in fixed income markets, dramatically expanded its market wide recognition with the introduction of trading in credit default swaps after the mid-1990s. The reason for this delayed importance was that it took until then for the interest rate derivative markets to mature sufficiently for sophisticated financial institutions to successfully manage/hedge equity, foreign currency and interest rate risk. This risk-controlling ability enabled firms to seek out arbitrage opportunities, and in the process, lever up on the remaining financial risks, which are credit/counterparty, liquidity, and operational risk. This greater risk exposure by financial institutions to both credit and liquidity risk (as evidenced by the events surrounding the failure of Long Term Capital Management) spurred the more rapid development of credit risk modeling.

As the first serious contribution to credit risk modeling, Merton's original model was purposely simple. Merton considered credit risk in the context of a firm issuing only a single zero coupon bond. As such, risky debt could be decomposed into riskless debt plus a short put option on the assets of the firm. Shortly thereafter, extensions to address this simple liability structure were quickly discovered by Black and Cox [11] Jones *et al.* [94] and Leland [100] among others.

The structural approach to credit risk modeling has two well-known empirical shortcomings: (i) that default occurs smoothly, implying that bond prices do not jump at default and (ii) that the firm's assets are neither traded nor observable. The first shortcoming means that for short maturity bonds, credit spreads as implied by the structural model are smaller than those observed in practice. Extensions of the structural approach that address the absence of a jump at default include that by Zhou [125]. These extensions, however, did not overcome the second shortcoming.

Almost 20 years after Merton's original paper, Jarrow and Turnbull [85, 86] developed an alternative credit risk model that overcame the second shortcoming. As a corollary, this approach also overcame the first shortcoming. This alternative approach has become known as the *reduced form model*. Early important contributions to the reduced form model were by Lando [97], Madan and Unal [103], Jarrow *et al.* [80], and Duffie and Singleton [49].

As the credit derivative markets expanded, so did extensions to the reduced form model. To consider credit rating migration, Jarrow *et al.* [80] introduced a Markov chain model, where the states correspond to credit ratings. Next, there was the issue of default correlation for pricing credit derivatives on baskets (e.g., credit default obligations (CDOs)). This correlation was first handled with Cox processes (Lando [97]).

The use of Cox processes induces default correlations across firms through common state variables that drive the default intensities. But when conditioning on the state variables, defaults are assumed to be independent across firms. If this structure is true, then after conditioning, defaults are diversifiable in a large portfolio and require no additional risk premium. The implication is that the empirical and risk neutral default intensities are equal. This equality, of course, would considerably simplify direct estimation of the risk neutral default intensity [81].

This is not the only mechanism through which default correlations can be generated. Default contagion is also possible through competitive industry considerations. This type of default contagion is a type of "counterparty" risk, and it was first studied in the context of a reduced form model by Jarrow and Yu [90]. "Counterparty risk" in a reduced form model, an issue in and of itself, was previously studied by Jarrow and Turnbull [86, 87].

Finally, default correlation could be induced *via* information flows as well. Indeed, a default by one firm may cause other firm's default intensities to increase as the market learns about the reasons for the realized default (see [120]). Finding a suitable correlation structure for implementation and estimation is still a topic of considerable interest.

An important contribution to the credit risk model literature was the integration of structural and reduced form models. These two credit risk models can be understood through the information sets used in their construction. Structural models use the management's information set, while reduced form models use the market's information set. Indeed, the manager has access to the firm's asset values, while the market does not. The first paper making this connection was by Duffie and Lando [46] who viewed the market as having the management's information set plus noise, due to the accounting process. An alternative view is that the market has a coarser partitioning of management's information, that is, less of it. Both views are reasonable, but the mathematics is quite different. The second approach was first explored by Cetin *et al.* [27].

Credit risk modeling continues to be a hot area of research. Books on the current state of the art with respect to credit risk derivative pricing models are by Lando [98] and Bielecki and Rutkowski [6].

## **References**

- [1] Andersen, L. & Brotherton-Ratcliffe, R. (2005). Extended LIBOR market models with stochastic volatility, *Journal of Computational Finance* **9**, 1–26.
- [2] Amin, K. & Jarrow, R. (1991). Pricing foreign currency options under stochastic interest rates, *Journal of International Money and Finance* **10**(3), 310–329.
- [3] Amin, K. & Jarrow, R. (1992). Pricing American options on risky assets in a stochastic interest rate economy, *Mathematical Finance* **2**(4), 217–237.
- [4] Bachelier, L. (1990). *Theorie de la Speculation*, Ph.D. Dissertation, L'Ecole Normale Superieure. English

translation in P. Cootner (ed.) (1964) The Random Character of Stock Market Prices, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

- [5] Bank, P. & Baum, D. (2004). Hedging and Portfolio optimization in illiquid Financial markets with a large trader, *Mathematical Finance* **14**(1), 1–18.
- [6] Bielecki, T. & Rutkowski, M. (2002). *Credit Risk: Modeling, Valuation, and Hedging*, Springer Verlag.
- [7] Bjork, T. & Christensen, B. (1999). Interest rate dynamics and consistent forward rate curves, *Mathematical Finance* **9**(4), 323–348.
- [8] Bjork, T., Di Masi, G., Kabanov, Y. & Runggaldier, W. (1997). Towards a general theory of bond markets, *Finance and Stochastics* **1**, 141–174.
- [9] Bjork, T. & Svensson, L. (2001). On the existence of finite dimensional realizations for nonLinear forward rate models, *Mathematical Finance* **11**(2), 205–243.
- [10] Black, F. (1976). The pricing of commodity contracts, *Journal of Financial Economics* **3**, 167–179.
- [11] Black, F. & Cox, J. (1976). Valuing corporate securities: some effects of bond indenture provisions, *Journal of Finance* **31**, 351–367.
- [12] Black, F. & Scholes, M. (1973). The pricing of options and corporate liabilities, *Journal of Political Economy* **81**, 637–659.
- [13] Boyle, P. (1977). Options: a Monte Carlo approach, *Journal of Financial Economics* **4**, 323–338.
- [14] Brace, A., Gatarek, D. & Musiela, M. (1997). The market model of interest rate dynamics, *Mathematical Finance* **7**(2), 127–147.
- [15] Brennan, M. & Schwartz, E. (1977). The valuation of American put options, *Journal of Finance* **32**, 449–462.
- [16] Brennan, M. & Schwartz, E. (1978). Finite difference methods and jump processes arising in the pricing of contingent claims: a synthesis, *Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis* **13**, 461–474.
- [17] Brennan, M. & Schwartz, E. (1979). A continuous time approach to the pricing of bonds, *Journal of Banking and Finance* **3**, 135–155.
- [18] Broadie, M. & Glasserman, P. (1997). Pricing American style securities by simulation, *Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control* **21**, 1323–1352.
- [19] Carmona, R. (2007). HJM: a unified approach to dynamic models for fixed income, credit and equity markets. *Paris-Princeton Lectures on Mathematical Finance 2004*, *Lecture Notes in Mathematics*, vol. 1919, Springer Verlag.
- [20] Carr, P., Geman, H., Madan, D. & Yor, M. (2003). Stochastic volatility for levy processes, *Mathematical Finance* **13**, 345–382.
- [21] Carr, P. & Jarrow, R. (1995). A discrete time synthesis of derivative security valuation using a term structure of futures prices, in *Handbooks in OR & MS*, R. Jarrow, V. Maksimoviz & W. Ziemba, eds, Elsevier Science B.V., Vol. 9, pp. 225–249.
- [22] Carr, P., Jarrow, R. & Myneni, R. (1992). Alternative characterizations of American put options, *Mathematical Finance* **2**(2), 87–106.