# 4

## **Constitutional Amendment and Socio-Political Implications**

*Sunder Raman*

### ❑❑ **Introduction**

A Constitution is a system of fundamental laws or principles for the governance of a nation. It differs from a statute in that a statute must provide, at least to a certain degree, the details of the subject it treats, whereas a constitution usually states the general principles and framework of the law and government.<sup>1</sup> Permanence and generality are the main characteristics of most of the constitutions in the world. As a rule, a constitution does not deal in detail, but enunciates the general principles and directions, for the framers of a constitution cannot anticipate conditions which may subsequently arise in the progress of a nation or establish all laws which may be necessary from time to time to do justice to the changing conditions of a community. It is not practicable for a written constitution to specify, in detail, all its objects and purposes or the means by which they are to be carried into effect; nor is such an exercise considered necessary or desirable. On the other hand, it is considered unwise to provide immutable rules for future exigencies which are at best dimly perceived and which can be best dealt with by the legislature keeping in view the unfolding circumstances. Besides, a modern democratic constitution not only establishes the basis of the governmental system, but also serves as an effective means of public welfare, and this warrants its adaptability more than anything else.

The idea of a rigid constitution is logically untenable; for human societies grow and develop with the passage of time and, unless a provision is made for such constitutional readjustments as the internal development of society requires, they must stagnate and retrogress. Moreover, a constitution that does not provide for a formal method of amendment, leaves room for unconstitutional and violent changes. C.J. Friedrich rightly observes that "a well-drawn constitution will provide for its own amendment in such a way as to forestall, as far as is humanly possible, revolutionary upheavals."<sup>2</sup>

In view of the need for changes in the constitution of India, the framers of the constitution did not opt for a very rigid procedure for amendment as is usually the case with federal constitutions, and preferred a "facile procedure." However, they did not make the procedure so easy that it made the constitution unstable. They tried to strike a balance between constitutional stability and change. Unlike many written constitutions which have only one procedure for affecting "any change of any kind in any part of the constitution," the constitution of India provides for a variety of procedures to amend it, a feature which has been commended by KC Wheare, for the reason that uniformity in the amending process imposes "quite unnecessary restrictions on the amendment of parts of a constitution."<sup>3</sup>

#### **Procedure of Amendment**

The founding fathers of our constitution intended our Parliament, elected on the basis of universal adult suffrage, to be powerful enough to make quick changes in the constitution when needed for social and economic transformation. Therefore, they made several provisions of the constitution amendable by a simple majority of Parliament. Part XX of our constitution consisting only of Article 368 which deals with the power of Parliament to amend the constitution and procedure therefore. It reads as under:

*368. Power of Parliament to amend the constitution and procedure therefore* …

- (1) *Notwithstanding anything in the constitution, Parliament may in exercise of its constituent power amend by way of addition, variation or repeal any provision of this constitution in accordance with the procedure laid down in this article.*
- (2) *An amendment of this constitution may be initiated only by the introduction of a Bill for the purpose in either House of Parliament, and when the bill is passed in each House by a majority of the total membership of that House, and by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members of that House present and voting, it shall be presented to the President who shall give his assent to the Bill and thereupon the constitution shall stand amended in accordance with the terms of the Bill.*

Provided that if such amendment seeks to make any change in:

- (a) *Article* 54, *Article* 55, *Article* 73, *Article* 162, *Article* 241, *or*
- (b) *Chapter IV of Part V, Chapter V of Part VI, or Chapter I of Part XI, or*

- (c) *Any of the Lists in the Seventh Schedule, or*
- (d) *The representation of States in Parliament, or*
- (e) *The provision of this article, the amendment shall also require to be ratified by the Legislatures of not less than one half of the States by resolutions to that effect passed by those Legislatures before the Bill making provision for such amendment is presented to the President for assent.*
- (3) *Nothing in Article* 13 *shall apply to any amendment under this article.*
- (4) No *amendment of this constitution (including the provisions of Part III) made or purporting to have been made under this article (whether before or after the commencement of Section* 55 *of the constitution (Forty-second Amendment Act, 1976) shall be called in question in any court on any ground.*
- (5) *For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that there shall be no limitation whatever on the constituent power of Parliament to amend by way of addition, variation or repeal the provisions of this constitution under this article*. 4

In the given text, the amplified marginal heading to the article, clauses 1 and 3 and amendment in clause 2 indicated by italics, were inserted by the 24th Amendment Act, 1971/and clauses 4 and 5, by the 42nd Amendment Act, 1976.<sup>5</sup>

The constitution provides for three categories of amendments. The first category includes those amendments which can be affected by Parliament by a simple majority which is required for passing any ordinary law. The amendments contemplated in Articles 4, 169, para 7(2) of Schedule V and para 21(2) of Schedule VI fall within this category and are specifically excluded from the purview of Article 368 which is the specific provision in the constitution dealing with the powers and procedure to amend the constitution. Those amendments which can be affected by Parliament by a prescribed 'special majority' constitute the second category. And the third category consists of those amendments which require, in addition to such "special majority", ratification by at least one-half of the States legislatures.

#### **Amendment by a Simple Majority**

The following constitutional provisions can be amended by a simple majority at the instance of the Union government:

- 1. Admission of a new state under Article 2, along with the consequential amendments in Schedule I (which defines the territory of a State) and Schedule IV (which deals with the allocations of seats to a State in the Rajya Sabha);
- 2. Provisions relating to the citizenship of India; Article 11;

- 3. Provisions relating to the exercise of executive power by a State or its Officers in respect of a matter over which Parliament has power to make laws: Article 73(2);
- 4. Provisions relating to the salaries and allowances of ministers: Article 75(6) and the consequential amendments to Schedule II;
- 5. Provisions to the salaries and allowances of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the House of the People, and the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States: Article 97 and consequential amendments to Schedule II;
- 6. Provisions relating to salaries and allowances of the Members of Parliament Article 106;
- 7. Provisions relating to the number of judges in the Supreme Court; Article 124(1);
- 8. Provisions relating to the privileges, allowances and rights of judges of the Supreme Court; Article 125(2);
- 9. Provisions relating to appeals to the Supreme Court: Article 133(3);
- 10. Provisions relating to review of the judgements of the Supreme Court; Article 137;
- 11. Provisions relating to the salaries and allowances of the Comptroller and the Auditor-General: Article 148(3), and the consequential amendments to Schedule II;
- 12. Provisions relating to the composition of the Legislative Councils: Article 172(2);
- 13. Provisions relating to the salaries and allowances of the judges of the High Court: Article 22(2) and the consequential changes in Schedule II;
- 14. Provisions relating to English language; Article 343(3);
- 15. Provisions relating to the language to be used in the Supreme Court and the High Courts: Article 348(1);
- 16. Provisions relating to the creation of Legislature and Council of Ministers for a Union Territory: Article 239 A;
- 17. Provisions relating to the administration and control of the Scheduled Areas and Scheduled Tribes: Para 7 of Schedule V; and
- 18. Provisions relating to the administration and control of Tribal Areas: Para 21 of Schedule Vl.

In addition to Parliament's power to amend the constitution in the aforesaid areas, the State Legislative Assemblies also have the power to amend Article 164(5) which relates to the salaries and allowances of ministers in the States.

Strictly constitutionally speaking, the amendments in the aforesaid areas cannot be called constitutional amendments, because, for these amendments, the procedure laid down in Article 368 (which specially deals with amendments of the constitution) is not required to be followed. However, it is averred here that these are amendments to the constitution inasmuch as the constitution stands amended, albeit by simple majority.

#### **Amendments at the Instance of the State Governments**

The amendments at the instance of the state governments fall under two categories: (1) some of the provisions of the constitution can be amended at the instance of a State, and (2) some can be amended in consultation with the states. The provisions relating to the Upper House in a state fall under the first category. Whether a State will create or abolish an Upper House, entirely depends on the will of the state. When, under Article 169, a state assembly passes a resolution by a majority of not less than two-thirds of its members present and voting for having or abolishing its Upper House, the Parliament may pass a law in this behalf by a simple majority. Once such a law is passed, the constitution stands amended.

The provisions relating to the formation of a state and alteration of the boundaries or name of a state fall under the second category. Under Articles 3 and 4, Parliament has the power to form new states and alter the boundaries and names of the existing states. It can also make consequential changes in Schedules I and IV. Parliament can do so by passing a law by a simple majority. But, no such Bill can be introduced in Parliament except on the recommendation of the President. When such a law is going to affect the area, boundary or name of a state, the bill has to be referred to the legislature of the affected state for its views thereon within such period as may be specified in the reference (this period may be extended by the President). Once such a law is passed, the constitution stands amended accordingly.

#### **Amendment by Two-thirds Majority and with the Concurrence of Half of the States**

The following constitutional provisions can be amended by a two-third majority and with the concurrence of half of the states:

- 1. Mode and manner of the election of the President of India: Articles 54 and 55;
- 2. Extent of the executive power of the Union: Article 73;
- 3. Extent of the executive power of the States: Article 162;
- 4. Constitution of a High Court for a Union Territory: Article 241;
- 5. Provisions relating to the Union judiciary: Chapter IV of Part V of the constitution: Articles 124-127;
- 6. Provisions relating to the High Courts: Chapter V of Part VI of the constitution: Articles 214-231;
- 7. Provisions relating to the distribution of legislative powers between the Union and the States: Chapter I of Part XI of the constitution of India: Articles 245-255;
- 8. Provisions relating to the three lists: Schedule VII;

- 9. Provisions relating to the representation of states in Parliament: Article 80 and Schedule IV; and
- 10. Provision relating to the amendment of the constitution: Article 368. For the amendment of the aforesaid provisions of the constitution, the procedure laid down in Article 368 has to be followed.<sup>6</sup>

The provisions other than those which have been discussed under the previous two heads can be amended by a special majority vote in Parliament, i.e., by a majority of the total memberships of each House of Parliament and by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members of each House present and voting. For the amendment of these provisions, no ratification by the States is required.<sup>7</sup>

#### **Assent of the President**

In each of the aforesaid cases, an amendment of the constitution can be initiated only by an introduction of a Bill in either House of Parliament, and in each case, the assent of the President of India is obligatory. Without the assent of the President the constitution cannot be amended.<sup>8</sup>

#### **Constitutional Amendments Assailed and the Shifting Judicial Stance**

The first attack on Parliament's power to amend the constitution came in *Slzankari Prasad*<sup>9</sup>case, soon after the constitution was promulgated. In this case, the First Amendment Act was erroneously assailed on the ground that it infringed upon the right to property, a Fundamental Right (then), and attracted the prohibition of Article 13(2) of the constitution. In fact, the first constitutional amendment which caused curtailment of Fundamental Rights was enacted by the Provisional Parliament, the same body as the Constituent Assembly (which continued to function as Parliament till the new Parliament was elected after the first general elections in 1952). The amendment was, therefore, for act of the same persons who had made our constitution. On 5th October 1951, the Supreme Court unanimously declared the impugned Act valid on the ground that the power in exercise of which the Amendment Act had been passed, was a constituent power and the validity of the exercise of that power was not within the reach of judicial process. Again, when the Seventeenth Amendment was challenged in the *Sajjan Singh*<sup>10</sup>case, the Supreme Court examined *inter alia* the scope and reach of the amending power and arrived at the conclusion that the Court's earlier decision in the *Shankari Prasad* was correct.

The Supreme Court, however, in 1967, usurped the power of judicial review of constitutional amendments by the narrowest margin when it declared in the *Golaknath*<sup>11</sup>case that the Fundamental Rights could not be abridged or taken away even through the process of constitutional amendment. Notwithstanding, earlier decisions of the Court, the majority led by Chief Justice K. Subba Rao and Hidayatullah Justice in this case misconstrued Articles 368 and 13(2) and came to the conclusion that Article 368 was controlled by Article 13(2).

The government passed the 24th Amendment<sup>12</sup> to supersede the *Golaknath* decision. The Amendment provided that the power of Parliament to amend the constitution was to be found in Article 368; the amending power was a constituent power; Parliament could amend any part of the constitution, including Part III; it was obligatory for the President to give assent to a bill amending the constitution; and the provisions of Article 13 would not be applicable to any amendment of the constitution. The 24th Amendment tried to bury the *Golaknath* decision completely. One wishes that *Golaknath* had passed off as a solitary bad event in our constitutional history, but that was not to be, *Golaknath* turned out to be the beginning of the intra-governmental discord over the amending power.

In 1972, the Supreme Court was called upon to consider the validity of the 24th, 25th, and 29th Amendments in the famous *Kesavananda Bharati*<sup>13</sup>case. The *Golaknath* decision was also reconsidered. *Kesavananda* provided yet another opportunity to the Supreme Court to rule upon the limits of the amending power. In this case, the *Golaklnath* decision was over-ruled to the extent that the Court conceded wider amending powers to Parliament and lifted the embargo of Article 13 placed by the earlier Bench in the *Golaknath* case. But the Court interpreted the 24th Amendment and, consequently, Article 368 in its own way. It upheld the validity of 'the 24th Amendment Act, but at the same time declared that on the basis of certain implied limitations, the amending power could not damage or destroy the basic features of the constitution. The decision opened a Pandora's box and created uncertainty, as it did not specify the basic features of the constitution. In fact, the Court widened the basis of *Golaknath's* limitation and, thereby, the scope of judicial review.<sup>14</sup> Instead of resolving the controversy raised by the *Golaknath* case, the Supreme Court through *Kesavananda*  redefined the argument advanced in the earlier case.<sup>15</sup>It prevented the Fundamental Right plus much more from being damaged or destroyed by constitutional amendment.

In 1975-76, during the period of internal emergency, the government enacted the 39th Amendment Act which *inter alia* inserted Article 329(a) to validate the election of the Prime Minister and to wipe off appeals and crossappeals in the election dispute that were lying before the Supreme Court of India. The validity of the 39th Amendment was assailed on the ground that it had violated the basic structure limitation laid down in the *Kesavananda Bharati* case. The 39th Amendment was impeachable on moral and political grounds, but it could not have constituted the basis for judicial invalidation. However, the Court held that since the Amendment had not made any change in Article 368, the 24th Amendment which laid the law in respect to the amending power could be applied only as it was interpreted by the majority of judges in *Kesavananda.* In sum, the *Kesavananda* judgement was considered as binding on the Supreme Court, and the *Election* case<sup>16</sup> was decided accordingly. The counsel for the government was left with a limited scope for arguing in favour of the 39th Amendment, and his argument rested on the slippery ground that the impugned parts of the 39th Amendment did not damage or destroy the basic structure of the constitution. Consequently, the impugned parts of the 39th Amendment were struck down on the basis of basic structural limitations, although there was no unanimity on the basis features that had been violated by the amendment and each judge chose his own path to invalidate the amendment.

The decision in the *Election* case provided a new dimension to the theory of basic structure limitation. It declared that the amending power was subject to the theory of separation of power; that the amending power could not become a judicial power; and that there was a difference between the constituent power and the amending power.<sup>17</sup>

Just as the 24th Amendment was enacted to supersede the *Golaknath*  decision, the Parliament added clauses (4) and (5) to Article 368 through Section 55 of the 42nd Amendment to nullify the effect of the *Kesavanada*  decision. According to the two clauses, no court could question any amendment of the constitution on any ground and there were to be no limitations on the constituent power of Parliament to amend the constitution. The 42nd Amendment Act was a firm communication to the Supreme Court to the effect that the Parliament had an absolute power to amend the constitution. Section 4 of the 42nd Amendment Act amended Article 32(c) to give preponderance to all the Directive Principles of State Policy over the Fundamental Rights laid down under Article 14, 19, and 31 and the government also demonstrated that it needed an unfettered amending power to bring about revolutionary socioeconomic changes in society<sup>18</sup>. Subsequently, when the Amendment was substantially repealed by the Janata Dal government, the above-mentioned Sections 4 and 55 of the Amendment Act remained unaltered, because the Congress with a majority in the Rajya Sabha refused to give its approval to the proposed changes in respect to these two sections.

It was hoped that the 42nd Amendment would take care of the basic features theory and bring an end to the conflict between the government and the judiciary over the amending power. But that did not happen. Sections 4 and 55, *inter alia*, came for judicial review in the *Minerva Mills*<sup>19</sup> case and the Supreme Court affirmed the theory of basic structure and revived the *Kesavananda* judgement. After the 24th Amendment, the *Golaknath*decision had stood over-ruled, and after the 42nd Amendment the *Kesavananda* decision should have ceased to exist. But the apex court through *Minerva Mills* case elbowed Section 55 out and brought back *Kesavananda.* 

Further, the Supreme Court in *P. Sambamurthy v. State of Andhra Pradesh* invalidated Clause 5 along with its provision of Article 371-0 which had been introduced in the constitution by the 32nd Amendment Act, 1973; the provision, the Clause 5 had empowered the State Government of Andhra Pradesh to modify or even nullify an award given against it by the Administrative Tribunal constituted under Clause 3 of the same Article. The five-member bench headed by Chief Justice Bhagwati declared the impugned part as shocking and subversive of the principles of justice; the Court held that it was violative of the basic structure doctrine and therefore, was unconstitutional. Thus, the Supreme Court knocked down yet another constitutional amendment, an amendment that had existed for twelve long years.

The above discussions clearly show that there has been a steady usurption expansion of judicial review power since the *Golaknath* case*.*  The Supreme Court through *Kesavananda*, and subsequent cases seems to have firmly established its power of invalidating constitutional amendments. However, it must be acknowledged that the Supreme Court has not interfered in many cases on the basis of "basic structure" doctrine; in particular, it has allowed the socio-economic changes to take place through the constitutional amendments.

#### **Constitutional Amendment and Social Change**

Various constitutional amendments have been enacted to bring about important socio-economic changes. In fact, the government had to take the help of Article 368 to implement agrarian reforms, soon after the launching of our constitution. From the very beginning, many social legislation and executive actions were held invalid by the Court. Consequently, the constitution had to be amended to overcome the difficulties created by these judicial decisions. Every amendment has been brought about with some specific purpose. The amendments which aimed at ushering in an new egalitarian social order are the First, Fourth, Seventeenth, Twentyfourth, Twenty-fifth, Twenty-sixth, Twenty-ninth, Thirty-ninth, Fortieth, Forty-second, Forty-fourth, Forty-seventh, Forty-ninth, Fifty-first, Sixty-fifth, and Seventy-third to Seventy-eighth.

The first major challenge to the constitution came when the Supreme Court held the abolition of *Zamindaris* as void in *Kamenshwar Singh vs. State of Bihar*<sup>20</sup>*, Ramesh Thaper vs. State of Madras*<sup>21</sup>and *Motilal vs. State of U.P.*<sup>22</sup>The Court invalidated the Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1950, on the ground that it discriminated between the rich and poor in determining the compensation for acquired property. The Court held that the compensation provided in the Act was unjust/inequitable and in some cases illusory. The government was committed to protect such legislation and, therefore, came forward with the First Amendment<sup>23</sup>, the main object of which was to secure fully the constitutional validity of *Zamindari* and *Jagirdari* laws in general, and of certain specific State Acts, in particular. For this purpose, the amendment added Articles 31-A and 31-B. The famous IX Schedule also came into being to preclude the judicial review of the Acts in the Schedule.

Like the First Amendment, the Fourth Amendment<sup>24</sup> also intended to bring the constitutional provisions in line with the new social order. The difficulties arose once again because decisions of the Supreme Court in cases, like *State of West Bengal vs. Bela Banerjee*<sup>25</sup>*, Owarkadas Shriniwas vs. Sholapur Spinning Co. Ltd.*<sup>26</sup>and *State of West Bengal vs. Subodh Gopal.*<sup>27</sup> The Court had given a very wide meaning to clauses (i) and (ii) of Article 31 regarding the limitation against compulsory acquisition of property. State's power needed re-definition in this context, so as to distinguish it from cases in which the operation of regulatory or prohibitory laws of the state resulted in deprivation of property. Further, the judicial decisions interpreting the Fundamental Rights had raised serious difficulties in the implementation of social welfare programme such as fixing the limit on agricultural holdings, conferment of rights on tenants, proper planning of urban and rural areas, clearance of slums, etc. The state also required power to take over commercial or industrial undertaking or other property in the public interest. Furthermore, the government wanted certain Acts to be protected and, therefore, wanted to include them in the IX Schedule.

The Fourth Amendment nullified the decision in the *Bela Banerjee*  case. It declared that the adequacy of compensation for acquiring private property could not be justiciable.

The amendment also clarified the right of Parliament or state legislature to make laws introducing State monopoly in any trade or commerce. The government was committed to see that the right to property did not come in the way of social revolution. The first and the fourth amendments were in pursuit of this object. When Kerala Agrarian Relations Act, 1961, the Madras Land Reforms Act, 1961 (fixation of ceiling on land), the Rajasthan Tenancy Act, 1955, and the Maharashtra Agricultural Land Act, 1961 (ceiling and holding), were struck down by the judiciary, the need for yet another constitutional amendments was thus felt. The definition to term 'Estate', in Article 31-A, was found lacking. According to the Supreme Court, it did not include lands held under *ryotwari* settlement and also other lands which figure in land reforms enactments. The situation became rather complicated as the term 'Estate' had come to be defined differently in different states. The Seventeenth Amendment Act<sup>28</sup>was passed to get over all these difficulties. The amendment defined 'Estate' widely by substituting old sub-clause (1) of clause (2) of Article 31(A) with a new clause and added 44 statutes relating to land reform in the Schedule. The Supreme Court though struck down the various legislative enactments it upheld the power of Parliament to amend the fundamental rights in *Shankari Prasad vs. Union of India* in 1965.<sup>29</sup>

An unfortunate situation arose in 1967 when the Supreme Court in the *Golaknath* case<sup>30</sup> revised its earlier stand and declared that the fundamental rights could not be impaired or taken away even through the process of amendment. This was an erroneous decision, to say the least. It created a political impasse, and Indira Gandhi who had just established herself in the internecine struggle ordered the mid-term poll. The election was fought to seek popular sanction from the electorate on the issue of parliamentary competence to amend the constitution, to implement the various socio-economic programmes. Indira Gandhi secured more than two-third majority and that enabled her government to pass the Twenty-fourth, the Twenty-fifth, the Twenty-sixth and the Twenty-ninth Amendments.

The Twenty-fourth Amendment was passed to nullify the effect of the *Golaknath* case, and to assert Parliament's right to amend the fundamental rights. The amendment made it abundantly clear that the Parliament had the power to amend any part of the constitution, including the fundamental right. The Supreme Court in the *Bank Nationalization*<sup>31</sup>case held that the properties taken over by the state like banks and other industrial units should be paid compensation according to the market-value. The government had not proposed to pay the fourteen nationalized banks the compensation according to the market value and, therefore, the Supreme Court invalidated the nationalization. To surmount the difficulties created by the decision, the Twenty-fifth Amendment was passed in 1971. The amendment substituted the word 'compensation' by the word 'amount' and forbade the courts to go into the question of quantum of compensation. The Twentyfifth Amendment also authorized the government to make laws to give effect to the Directive Principles specified in clauses (2) and (3) of Article 39. They were not to be declared void on the ground that they took away any of the fundamental rights guaranteed by Articles 14, 19, and 31. Thus, Article 31(c) sought to subordinate the fundamental rights to prevent concentration of wealth and to have economic programmes that could subserve the common good.

Indira Gandhi was committed to abolish Privy Purses of the erstwhile rulers. She described the Privy Purses as "anachronism" and got the princes derecognized and abolished their special privileges and privy purses through Presidential order. This Presidential order was challenged in the Supreme Court and the Court gave its ruling against it. The Twenty-sixth Amendment was subsequently enacted in December 1971, to nullify the court decision and to abolish the privy purses and special privileges of the princes. The amendment was justified by the Prime Minister and the Law Minister on the ground that it was necessary to transform the economic and social structure of the Indian society.

The Twenty-ninth and Thirty-fourth Amendments also belong to this category of amendments (made for socio-economic change). The Twentyninth Amendment included Kerala Land Reforms Act, 1969 and 1971, in the Ninth Schedule of the constitution which empowered the state government to take over the land in excess of the ceiling without paying compensation at the market value and the Thirty-fourth Amendment (1974) provided constitutional protection to all the 17 land reforms Acts passed by different states.<sup>32</sup>

Another important constitutional development took place when the Twenty-fourth, Twenty-fifth, and Twenty-ninth Amendments were challenged in the Supreme Court in the *Kesavananda Bharati* case. The Supreme Court though reversed its earlier decision in the *Golaknath* case and upheld Parliament's right to amend the constitution including the fundamental rights, it held that the basic structure or framework of the constitution could not be amended. The Court, thus, put fetters on Parliament's power to amend the constitution. (The Supreme Court has reaffirmed its faith in the doctrine of basic structure in the subsequent cases.)

Again, with a view to giving effect to progressive measures the government enacted Section 5 of the 39th Amendment Act (1975) and the 40th Amendment Act (1976). Both the Amendments added 38 and 64 new entries in the Ninth Schedule respectively. Besides the Acts relating to land reforms, the aforesaid section of the 39th Amendment *inter alia*  inserted the Industries (development and regulation) Act, 1951, the Mines and Minerals (regulation and development) Act, 1957, the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969, the Maintenance of Internal Security Act, 1971, the Cocking Coal Mines (nationalisation) Act, 1972, the General Insurance (nationalisation) Act, 1972, the Sick Textile Undertakings (taking over of management) Act, 1972, the Coal Mines (taking over management) Act, 1973, and the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 in the Ninth Schedule to pre-empt litigation. Similarly, the 40th Amendment *inter alia* gave protection to certain Central laws such as the Smugglers and Foreign Exchange Manipulators (forfeiture of property) Act, 1976, the Urban Land (ceiling and regulation) Act, 1976, the Essential Commodities Act, 1955, and certain provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939, by placing them in the Ninth Schedule. When the progressive legislations conceived in the interest of the public are allowed to be challenged in the court of law, the very purpose of enacting those stands are defeated.

The much discredited Forty-second Amendment was brought about with a view to revising the constitution. The comprehensive amendment did not leave any important area untouched. It *inter alia* sought to reassert once and for all the supremacy of Parliament and its plenary powers to amend any provision of the constitution; incorporated in the preamble the words 'Socialist' and 'Secular'; prescribed fundamental duties for the citizens and established primacy of the Directive Principles over certain fundamental rights.

The Forty-fourth Amendment omitted the right to property from the list of fundamental rights to enable the Parliament to go ahead with socioeconomic measures unimpeded. On the suggestion of the state governments of Assam, Bihar, Haryana, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, and the Administration of the Union Territory of Goa, Daman, and Diu to include some of their Acts relating to land reforms in the Ninth Schedule. The Fortyseventh Amendment Act, 1984, inserted as many as fourteen entries in the Schedule.

A couple of amendments have been made to help the development of tribal areas and representation of tribal people in the legislatures. The Forty-ninth Amendment provides constitutional sanctity to the autonomous District Council in the State of Tripura, meant to ensure rapid development of tribal areas and self-governance by the tribes. The Fifty-first Amendment changed Article 330 to provide for reservation of seats in the Lok Sabha for Scheduled Tribes in Meghalaya, Nagaland, Arunachal Pradesh, and Mizoram, and Article 332 to provide for similar reservation in the Legislative Assemblies of Nagaland and Meghalaya.

The Sixty-fifth Amendment has brought in a qualitative and comprehensive change in Article 338 of the constitution. It provides for a high level five-member National Commission for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes to investigate and monitor all matters relating to the safeguards provided for the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes under the constitution and law. It has also been vested with the power to recommend suitable measures for the protection, welfare and socio-economic development of the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes.

The Sixty-sixth Amendment added a further group of land reform enactments passed by the State legislatures of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, and Union Territory of Pondicherry to the IXth Schedule of the constitution, so that they could remain outside the purview of judicial review.

Moving on to the landmark Seventy-third Amendment of the constitution, it may be mentioned that the successive governments have been making efforts to revitalise the Panchayati Raj institutions in India. In 1989, Rajiv Gandhi's government introduced the 64th constitution Amendment Bill in Parliament and, likewise, in September 1990, the V.P. Singh government introduced the 74th constitution Amendment Bill, but these efforts did not fructify because to the dissolution of the Lok Sabha. It was only during P.V. Narasimha Rao's tenure as Prime Minister, the government succeeded in passing the 73rd constitutional Amendment. This historic amendment provides for an elaborate system of establishing panchayats as units of selfgovernment; it has added Articles 243-A to 243-0 and a fresh Schedule XI enumerating the powers and functions of Panchayati Raj institutions. The constitutional amendment *inter-alia* provides for a three-tier model of Panchayati Raj and reservation of seats for scheduled castes, scheduled tribes, and women in the panchayats. It also provides for constituting a Finance Commission, for each state, to look after the financial position of the Panchayati Raj institutions.

Again, the 74th Amendment is an important one. It deals with the establishment of municipalities as a part of the constitution. The amendment details the powers, duration, election, finance, and other related matters of different types of municipalities. It has added the Twelfth Schedule to the constitution, wherein 18 subjects are mentioned for the municipalities to handle.

The Seventy-sixth Amendment has been enacted to raise the reservation quota of government jobs and seats for admission in educational institutions in favour of socially and educationally backward classes to 69 per cent in Tamil Nadu. Further, the Amendment Act has been included in the IXth Schedule to save it from judicial scrutiny. This has been done at the behest of Tamil Nadu government. All the political parties in Tamil Nadu without exception put pressure on the Union government for its enactment; no political party wanted to miss an opportunity to have political mileage. However, this Act was assailed on the basis of *Indra Sawhney v. Union of India* before the apex Court.

The Seventy-seventh Amendment has added a new sub-section 4(a) to Article 16 of the constitution to enable the state to make any provision for reservation in matters of promotion in government jobs in favour of scheduled castes and scheduled tribes, if it is of the opinion that they are inadequately represented in services under the state.

The Seventy-eighth Amendment has been made to insert land reforms Act once again of various States in the IXth Schedule to give them constitutional protection from judicial invalidation. The Amendment adds 27 land reform acts bringing the total entries to 284 in the IXth Schedule.

And, finally, the Eighty-first constitution Amendment Bill, popularly called 'Women's Reservation Bill', has been drafted in consonance with the commitment made by practically all the political parties in their election manifesto favouring 1/3rd reservation of seats for women in the Lok Sabha and the State assemblies. It also forms part of the Common Minimum Program of the government. It is averred that one-third reservation is essential to empower women and strengthen the Indian democracy. In fact, more than one million women have already begun their political careers at the Panchayati Raj level, and when the women's reservation Bill is passed by Parliament, it will further help the cause of women's participation in the decision-making bodies.

The above discussion clearly reveals the objects and purposes of enacting various constitutional amendments. Judicial invalidation of good number of socio-economic legislative measures resulted in the enactments of aforementioned constitutional amendments. However, the enactment of such large constitutional amendments in the past decades cannot be justified. Undoubtedly, while some of the amendments were a natural product of evolution of the new political system, there were others which sub-served only the political power. By way of illustration, it may be mentioned that the purpose of rushing through 38th constitutional Amendment was only to prevent inquiry into the constitutionality of the proclamation of internal Emergency on 26th June 1975, and the following 39th Amendment was masterminded to oust the jurisdiction of courts retrospectively any petition challenging the Prime Minister's election. The much discredited 42nd Amendment was brought about to institutionalize Emergency; it whittled down fundamental rights and made serious inroads into our democratic polity. Many have also questioned the wisdom of enacting anti-defection law and blatantly discriminatory 59th Amendment. There are also amendments which have not only enlarged the size of Schedule IX, but have also changed its content. There is, in fact, something called "politics of IXth Schedule".

#### **Summation**

To sum up, it can be said that the founding fathers of our constitution were keen to bring about socio-economic revolution in free India through constitutional means and for that, they deliberately provided for a flexible procedure. However, they did not make the procedure so easy that it made the constitution unstable.

Part XX of our constitution containing Article 368 deals with the power to amend the constitution and the procedure therefor. The multiple mechanism provided, therein, has its own advantages. The original Article 368 and the subsequent modifications to it through 24th and 42nd constitutional Amendments leave no scope whatever for any kind of limitation on the amending power.

However, the Supreme Court decided to put limitations on the amending power while handing down its decision in the *Golaknath* case in 1967, and in 1973, it introduced the 'basic structure' limitation through *Kesavananda.*  The subsequent decisions of the apex Court only reaffirm and reiterate the *Kesavananda* judgement.

The successive governments have passed constitutional amendments to bring about important socio-economic and political changes, on the other, certain amendments smack of only politics and politicking. Also, it has been noticed that on many occasions, when national interest demanded, the ruling party received wholehearted support from the opposition for the passage of constitutional amendments.

In fact, there are two views about amending the Indian constitution. One, the constitution has failed to deliver, and it needs to be changed lock, stock, and barrel; and two, the constitution has served us well by and large, and the successive governments have been able to bring about significant changes through the available mechanism under the constitution. Hence, the present arrangement is satisfactory. The second view is supported here, as the constitution alone cannot bring in qualitative changes either in the society or in the functioning of the government. Even the best of constitutions may not be of help so long our society is afflicated with illiteracy, poverty, corruption and lawlessness, and we the people remain 'soft'. This sentiment has been succinctly expressed by Sabyasachi Mukherji, a former Chief Justice of India in the following words: "The root cause of India's failure in many fields is not in the structure of the constitution, but because we have not imbibed the requisite culture of living by constitutional morality, respecting law and order and the principle of accountability."

He further added, "The constitution was intended to bring about substantial changes in Indian society. In 1947, we achieved the goal of national independence, but the parallel goal of social, cultural, and economic revolution is still in the process."