## Chapter 10

# Women and Gender: Aspects of Inequality in Tribal Society

Ethnographic accounts of tribes in the form of monographs, handbooks, and inventories have been the hallmark of tribal studies in India until the country attained independence. These provide detailed information on different aspects of life among the tribes, such as economic activities, marriage and divorce, family relations, kinship patterns, religious practices, technology, arts and crafts, customs and traditions, rules of inheritance and succession, division of labour, and so on. It is from these accounts that we get an idea of the position of women in tribal societies, the restrictions and taboos they suffer, and the rights, privileges, and freedoms they enjoy.

### Tribal Women in a Traditional Setting

Studies on tribal women have been few, and these lack depth and comprehensiveness. In 1987, the Indian Anthropological Society published a region-wise survey of tribal women. The survey points out that the subject of tribal women has generally been ignored, and when studies do exist, they are brief or disposed of summarily.<sup> $\frac{1}{2}$ </sup> Except in some of the works of Elwin, Furer-Haimendorf, and some others, there has been no explicit discussion of the status of women in tribal society. Even in these works, the assessment of the status of women has been far from uniform. While some say that tribal societies generally assigned high status to women, others argue that women's position in tribal society is the same as that in other societies. Writing about the Nagas, Elwin, for example, remarks that 'tribal woman is in herself exactly the same as any other woman, with the same position, love and fears, the same devotion to the home, to husband and children, the same faults and the same virtues' (cited in Zehol 1998: 1). Yet elsewhere, he refers to Naga women as holding a high and honourable position, and

describes them as working on equal terms with the men in the fields and making their influence felt in the tribal council (Elwin 1961: 104). He makes a similar observation with regard to the Baigas, noting that Baiga women enjoy an excellent position in society. They enjoy freedom and exercise authority, play a leading part in marriage ceremonies, and have a reputation for witchcraft. Among the Baigas, there is no clear division of labour between men and women (Elwin 1986: 235–236). Furer-Haimendorf referring to the Nagas, on the other hand, writes:

Many women in most civilized parts of India may well envy the women of the Naga Hills their high status and their free happy life, and if you measure the cultural level of the people by the social position and personal freedom of its women you will think twice before looking down on the Nagas as savages (Furer-Haimendorf 1933: 101).

In a similar vein, Hutton attributes a higher social status to Sema Naga women on the ground that marriage among the tribe is based on choice and a girl is never married against her will. The Sema Naga woman occupies a high position in her husband's house and is treated well (Hutton 1921: 183). Other accounts, barring a few exceptions such as those by Mann (1996), Chauhan (1990), and Zehol (1998), are limited to a few paragraphs, or at best to a page or two, but with a discussion on the status of women largely missing.

The discrepancy in the descriptions of women in tribal society is mainly due to the way in which scholars conceive the term status. Broadly, two views may be discerned. The first refers to women's role in the social system, which entails rights and duties. Here status is linked with the role of women in the social system. Women's status is analyzed and assessed taking into consideration the mutual duties shared by men and women and the safeguards provided for the protection of each sex against the highhandedness of the other. The other usage of the term status is in the sense of prestige and honour, which may be studied in terms of women's legal status and opportunities for their participation in the wider society. In the studies of tribal women, however, such a distinction is often overlooked, and is almost used interchangeably.

Status in terms of prestige and honour can only be studied in relation to values in reference. Tribes have been studied primarily either with reference to the values of the Enlightenment, viz. freedom, equality, and fraternity, or

in relation to the values prevalent in the dominant society. In short, in studying tribes in relation to the 'other', the values have invariably been either those of the universal values of the Enlightenment or the values of the larger society in which freedom is often scorned and hierarchy much valued. Hardly any attempt has been made to study tribes in terms of the values prevailing in tribal society.

### Women in a Changing Tribal Society

Sociologists and social anthropologists have questioned the dichotomous conception of Indian society constructed during the colonial period. Though a distinction is maintained between 'tribe' and 'civilization', the two are not treated as isolated but as being in interaction with each other (Sinha 1958). Consequently, tribal society has not been seen as static but as undergoing a process of change. Change has been conceived as moving in a number of directions. Of these perspectives, the dominant view has focused on the change from tribe to caste. Indeed, much of the social anthropological discourse on tribes has been couched primarily in terms of the transformation of tribes into castes.

Changes occurring in tribal society invariably have been conceived of in terms of the tribe moving in the direction of becoming a part of 'civilization', by being assimilated into the society that the civilization represents. Historians and anthropologists have made such observations not only in the context of the past but also in the context of the present. Kosambi refers to tribal elements being fused into the general society. Similarly, Bose refers to tribes being absorbed into Hindu society. The fact that such claims have continued to appear in a large number of anthropological works in the post-independence period points to the persistence of the belief that tribes are being absorbed or assimilated into Hindu society, or that tribes are gradually turning into castes. In this journey towards absorption or assimilation, tribes are said to be at different levels or stages. Nowhere is this better reflected than in the classifications adopted by social anthropologists attempting to understand the process of tribal transformation in India. Tribes have not only moved in the direction of Hinduism and the Hindu way of life. Equally important has been their movement towards Christianity. All these developments have been

considered significant processes of cultural change in tribal societies. Yet we know little about the way these changes have affected the lives of women in these societies. How have women whose families have been acculturated into Hinduism adapted to the ethos of the new religious organization? What has been the extent of continuity and discontinuity in their lives? What have been the advantages and disadvantages faced by women in these changed situations? These questions have not been explored systematically in existing studies.

Some studies on the Sanskritization process among tribes do point to some changes. Roy Burman, drawing on the studies made during the period from the 1930s to the 1960s, demonstrates how tribes undergoing the process of Sanskritization are opting for early marriage as a matter of prestige and are discouraging widow remarriage as well as divorce and separation (Roy Burman 1988: 14; Sachchidananda 1988: 80). Mann makes similar observations regarding the Bhils. The freedom enjoyed by Bhil women in the spheres of marriage, premarital sex, divorce, access to decision-making bodies, etc. is being gradually curtailed with the adoption of Sanskritization. Their freedom in selecting a mate and marrying through elopement has been adversely affected. The purdah system among Bhil women is again an instance of borrowing from caste Hindus (Mann 1987: 155). Roy Burman regards divorce and separation in rural or tribal India evidence of desertion, indicative of the powerlessness of women. In this sense, he views Sanskritization as a positive influence. Further, he tends to link age at marriage more with the customary practice of bride price than with Sanskritization or distance from it. Citing the case of the Hos of Chhotanagpur, he points out that it is not uncommon among them for a woman to wait until her mid-thirties before she could find someone who could pay the bride price and become her life partner (Roy Burman 1988: 14).

With improvement in economic conditions, or even Sanskritization, it is argued, women workers tend to withdraw from outdoor agricultural work and allied activities. Observations available in the existing literature on the inverse relation between the rise in social status and the withdrawal of women from manual labour are taken in support of such an argument (Roy Burman 1988: 16). These observations, however, are brief, casual, and lack analytical rigoar. To begin with, Sanskritization is not the only basis for the rise in social status in tribal society. There is no doubt that with Sanskritization there has been a tendency among tribes to withdraw women from manual labour, but this has more to do with well-to-do cultivators who either inhabit multi-caste villages or their vicinities. Withdrawal of female labour from contexts and situations other than the one referred to above, even when Sanskritization has been at work, is usually absent. In other cases, rise in status, such as that resulting from a change in occupation, especially white-collar employment, has not necessarily led to the withdrawal of women from manual labour. Indeed, where such individuals are also tied to land and agriculture, women have continued performing their routine gender-specific agricultural activities. Where male members of the family are compelled to live away from the village because of the demands of employment, women have borne the added responsibility of organizing agricultural activities usually performed by men.

Whereas acculturation processes such as Sanskritization and Hinduization led to change of a certain kind among tribal women, the change moved in a somewhat different direction in the context of the conversion to Christianity. Christianity opened up the space for tribal women to participate in religious worship side by side with men, something that had been denied them under the earlier religious traditions of many tribal societies. Many Protestant denominations allow women to be appointed as deaconesses, preachers, and trustees. They have also been organized into women's groups within churches for carrying out social, religious, and welfare activities (Kelhou 1998: 59–60; Zehol 1998: 26–27).<sup>2</sup> Christianity as practiced by these groups has also made modern education accessible to women in tribal societies. On the other hand, it also introduced a variety of restrictions in the name of church ethics and law that militated against the freedom women had enjoyed in traditional tribal societies. Christianity also introduced segregation among boys and girls and put a stop to divorce, which was easy to work out in accordance with tribal customary law. Over and above this, gender inequality inherent in Christian churches and denominations continued.

Both Hinduization and Christianization thus led to a number of restrictions on the kinds of freedom women enjoyed in the traditional social setting. In the case of Hinduization, such restrictions were part of the concern with maintaining respectability and status; in the case of Christianization, it had more to do with religious morals and values. An inherent inadequacy of this perspective is that it fails to capture the variety of changes that occurred in tribal societies.

## Assumptions Underlying the Study of Tribes

Underlying the accounts of tribes in general and of women in particular is the basic assumption that tribes are primitive, savage, and backward. This point is made repeatedly in accounts of their means of livelihood and survival, technology, food habits, lifestyle, and, more importantly, through representations of their bodies. Tribes were invariably represented as halfclad, clothed in only leaves and grass, and at times as naked. They are shown vividly in pictorial form in anthropological and other works to emphasize their primitive existence. Such pictorial representation is now no longer the special privilege of anthropologists. It has now become an object of commerce, as seen from the sale of picture postcards of Andamanese tribes like the Jarwas and the Onges. Women feature more prominently than men in these representations. Some ethnographers like Elwin and Furer-Haimendorf celebrated such practices among tribes. Elwin described in detail the place of sex in tribal life, discussing the sexual life of children, the notion of erotic and sexual attractiveness, courtship and romance, and frequency of intercourse, for example, in the case of the Baigas (Elwin 1986: 230–270). That these practices were governed by certain codes and ethics has been overlooked or under-stressed.

While some anthropologists celebrated the status of women in tribal society take the states of their women. others considered tribes as savages and ridiculed them precisely on grounds. They criticised their character, customs, and morals. Tribal women had an exaggerated place in such representations. The dominant view of tribes and tribal societies treated them socially and culturally as almost animal-like. A study, for example, shows that as many as 95 per cent of upper-caste women respondents consider Bhil women socially inferior (Mann 1987: 105). Some administrators and scholars who wrote on tribes and tribal life also perpetuated such a view. This view was even internalized to some degree by members of the tribes themselves. Tribes were so viewed and treated precisely because their values were contrary to the dominant values of the larger society. Mandelbaum puts it this way:

Tribal people generally take direct, unalloyed satisfaction in pleasure of the senses, whether in food, alcoholic drink, sex or dance. The twice-born tend to be ambivalent about such pleasures, they are inclined to defer them or refine them and surround them with elaborate ritual (Mandelbaum 1970: 583).

The values governing the larger Indian society are, however, in the process of changing. Indeed, there has been a paradigm shift with regard to the nature of values sought and at work in the post-independence period. The ethos in the period as embodied in the Constitution and the country's laws is one of freedom, equality, and social justice. The latter principle also features prominently in contemporary public rhetoric. Along with this there has been a shift in the image of women in tribal society, especially among the educated and the enlightened. Ethnographers, British as well as Indian, were on the whole rooted in the spirit of Enlightenment rationality. To them, freedom, equality, and fraternity were the basic values in the assessment of individuals and groups. They invariably judged the position of women in tribal society in the context of the dominant values of the West, which were contrary to the dominant values of the larger Indian society. Therefore, almost all discussions on women in tribal society were pitched against the position of women in a caste-based society.

In recent years, there have been more focused discussions on the status of women in tribal society, and yet these discussions have also moved in different directions. Women in tribal society were portrayed as having a better status than that held by women in caste-based societies. Tribal women were shown as having greater freedom with respect to movement outside the home, choice in marriage, divorce, and remarriage, and access to property and resources. This is revealed by anthropological studies on the rules of inheritance, right to property, enjoyment of freedom, share in the decision-making process, etc. In short, the studies focus on the rights and privileges enjoyed by women, on the one hand, and the roles and responsibilities assigned to them because of their sex, on the other. Hence, tribal women were invariably depicted as having a higher social status than their counterparts in caste-based society. These aspects of tribal society are

still highlighted and are further corroborated by such demographic evidence as sex ratio and female workforce participation. This is the general image of women depicted in studies on tribal society. Nowhere is this more evident than in the proceedings of a series of seminars organized by the North-East Regional Centre of the ICSSR in different parts of the region on the status of women, held between May 1988 and February 1989.<sup>3</sup> Topics such as the economic burden and workload borne by tribal women as well as their access to education, food and nutrition, modern occupations, and political participation, especially in the modern context, have not received the kind of attention they deserve.

## Stages of Social Formation

The position of tribal women in the context of all-round socio-economic changes in tribal society has been another area of focus in the study of women in tribal society. Their position, involvement, participation, and role in various aspects of tribal life are discussed and analyzed in the context of such wider socio-economic changes.

One of the dominant ways of looking at change from this angle is to study changes in the means of livelihood and survival. This is seen most clearly in the change from food gathering to food production, or from swidden (slash-and-burn cultivation) to settled agriculture. Such a transformation is also seen as a shift from communal and collective ownership of land and use of labour to private ownership of land and labour.

Developments such as these have led to a critical examination of the idea of tribal society as egalitarian. Forms of inequality in traditional tribal society have been brought under scrutiny. Of these, gender inequality, has been highlighted as the most pervasive, irrespective of the stage of social formation. One of the aspects that has been highlighted in this context has been the relative position of women and men under different types of social formations such as food gathering and hunting, swidden agriculture, settled agriculture, and state formation (Nathan 1997; Menon 1993). The other way in which the position of men and women has been studied is in the context of different tribal societies without useing their social formations as the reference point. This has been done with respect to division of labour, forms

of property, religious institutions, family organization, and the state. Through an examination of the former, an attempt has been made to show how the establishment of patriarchy took place in tribal societies. It is shown how in social formations such as food gathering and swidden agriculture, a rigid division of labour was either absent, or how gender inequality in one sphere was offset by equality in another sphere. Citing the case of the Birhors of Jharkhand, Nathan, for example, shows how the greater importance of men due to their participation in the public domain, in this case, distribution of meat (prestige food) throughout the society, is neutralized by a similar kind of engagement by women through exchange and transaction activities in the market. Similarly, among the Khasis, the higher social status of women due to rights of ownership held by them over ancestral property is neutralized by the men's control over the decisionmaking process. It is not clear whether this inequality that Nathan explicates has more to do with shifting cultivation or with the institution of matriliny and settled habitation, as in the case of the Khasis. Again, Nathan primarily traces the monopolization of upper levels of the hierarchy by men in the formation of the state and to the establishment of individual property. Men's control over the ritualistic and public or political spheres is seen as a crucial factor in the struggle to exclude women from ownership of land (Nathan 1997). Yet the cases of the Khasis with state-like institutions, and the Jaintias with full-fledged state institutions, do not seem to support such an argument. Women continue to own land, and the monopolization of upper levels of the hierarchy is still absent among them.

Indeed, some of the serious problems from which women suffer, such as being accused of witch-hunting, are traced by scholars to the pattern of landownership in tribal societies. Kelkar and Nathan, for example, argue that it is the life interest of a widow in the entire land of her husband that is a major fetter on the property rights of the husband's male agnates. Following this, they argue that victims of witch-hunting are not only women in general, but widows who have a life interest in their husband's land in particular. The life interest of a widow in her husband's land restricts the property rights of the male agnates of the deceased, for whom the use of the land for accumulation or for consumption has to wait until after the death of the widow. A widow without children is, therefore, more

vulnerable to attack on the pretext of being a witch (Kelkar and Nathan 1997: 263). While there may be some association between the two in some cases, it is difficult to generalise that witch-hunting is connected primarily with ownership of land. Anyone concerned with the study of witchcraft is familiar with the fact that it is much more complex than a practice associated only with property rights. Indeed, a number of witch-hunting cases have been reported from time to time from the tea gardens of Jalpaiguri district in West Bengal, where access to property was hardly the issue (Gupta 1979).

The myth of gender equality or the higher status of women in tribal societies has also been brought under scrutiny through the examination of such topics as customary law in relation to women in the areas of property, inheritance, marriage, and so on. It has been shown that women in tribal societies are put at a disadvantage vis-à-vis men (Nongbri 1998). It is interesting to note that the very practices illustrated as pointers to higher social status in one kind of setting turn out to be in-built depressors in another. Nongbri makes this point in her discussion of bride price. Referring to several tribes in Arunachal Pradesh, she points out how women among them are treated as mere commodities, procured easily by men through financial settlement in the form of bride price, a custom originally intended to compensate the girl's family for the loss of an economically active member. The custom of bride price as the socially legitimate purchase of a wife has thus become a convenient justification for men to abuse their wives and to treat them as disposable commodities. Nongbri writes that the system of bride price has proved to be a bane for women and lies at the root of the proliferation of polygamous unions as wealthy men can take on a number of wives simply by paying an agreed upon sum to the girl's family (Nongbri 1998: 33–34). Unnithan-Kumar in his study of the Taivar Girasia, a tribal group in Rajasthan, points out that bride price is viewed not so much as a recognition of a woman's contribution to the household or as a payment for the loss of a productive member, but as compensation to the father of the bride and his agnatic group for past expenditure on her maintenance, particularly consumption of food. Based on this, Unnithan-Kumar argues that bride price (valued in practical terms) is regarded as an important contribution that women make to the production of reproduction.

The lack of ownership of property rights by women is justified by the Girasias on the ground that women after marriage move from their natal to their affinal villages (Unnithan-Kumar 1997: 205–206).

In this context, there are two aspects on which I would like to comment.

- 1. It is an established fact that the division of labour in tribal society is based more on sex than any other factor. Division of labour has been both fluid and rigid. It is, however, not clear as to what stage and on what principle the division of labour in tribal society could be said to have assumed the form of inequality of rank or status between the sexes. There is little discussion of how and on what basis the differences, especially those between the sexes, came to be graded (whether divisions were merely the those of work and labour, and therefore devoid of the evaluation and gradation, intrinsic to the evaluation of being of high or low social status). Hence the study of the status of tribal women poses certain problems. It is difficult to study women from the perspective of the values inherent in these societies, especially since these values are based on notions of collectivity, equality, and sharing. Hence, rather than talking of high or low social status, it is more pertinent to talk of gender inequality. In the case of the latter, one can examine the relative position of women and men in relation to their access to equal opportunity, both formal and substantive.
- 2. The taboo on women touching or using the plough in tribal society has been seen as a way of denying women control over the means of production, viz. land (Nathan 1997; Kishwar 1987: 96). This lack of access to and control over land is, however, already denied to women in tribal societies by existing customary laws. Oraon and Ho women, forbidden by taboo from holding the plough, for example, are already denied access to land by the customary laws of their societies. The explanation for the denial of women's access to land in terms of taboo thus seems far from adequate. After all, even the Brahmans are forbidden by taboo from ploughing, but that does not mean denial of access to land for them. Even in swidden agriculture, which Boserup describes as a women's farming system, the allocation of plots is made to men in their capacity as the heads of households, though women exercise greater control over the plots after they have been allocated. There has also been tribal land under swidden agriculture controlled and distributed by the chiefs, such as among the Mizos, the Semas, and the Konyaks. There is no custom of plough cultivation among these tribes; yet women are denied access to land even in these communities.

## Social Differentiation

Another way of locating change has been in the increasing social differentiation taking place in tribal societies. Such social differentiation is rooted in forces outside of tribal societies, such as introduction of private property in land, growth of trade and the emergence of the market, emigration of non-tribes in search of land and employment, spread of modern education, opening up of new occupations, state-sponsored programmes, and similar activities. Accordingly, social differentiation has moved along different lines. The tribes lost their land and were compelled

to take up employment as labourers in nearby quarries and coal fields and in emerging towns as unskilled or semi-skilled workers (Vidyarthi 1970; Banerjee 1981), or move permanently or temporarily elsewhere in search of work, such as plantations in Bengal and Assam. A minority has been able to take advantage of the forces unleashed by the market and the benefits extended by the state to tribes. This has led to differentiation among tribes based on criteria such as education, occupation, income, wealth, and assets. They have become differentiated into categories such as the rich, the middle, the poor, and the landless. This has led to the emergence of class relations, traditionally absent in tribal societies (Shah 1982; Bose 1984; Pathy 1984). There is, however, a lack of a gender perspective on the differentiation witnessed by tribal societies over the years. There has been no sustained discussion on whether relations between men and women have remained the same across different social categories in tribal societies or whether they have changed. A few studies do provide some insights into this dimension. For example, Punalekar in his study of tribes like the Dhodia, the Chodhra, the Gamit, and others in Gujarat points to a division between the well-to-do and the lower strata. This difference in social and political behaviour is also reflected in the social situation of the women of the two groups. Women of the well-off section have come to enjoy certain advantages. There daughters are enrolled in local schools for pre-primary education. There is a distinct tendency among these sections to provide girls higher education in schools away from the native village. Many of them join professional courses, such as teaching and nursing, and some even pursue technical courses. They also take advantage of the facilities provided under the reservation policy. Migration to cities for education provides them with opportunities to acquaint themselves with urban ways of living and thinking. Their food habits and dress preferences reflect the influence of the urban way of life. There is also a tendency among them, on the one hand, to emulate the norms and practices of the women of the dominant caste groups and, on the other hand, to deliberately abandon or de-emphasize their own traditional customs, rituals, and social practices. There is also increasing disregard for, and even indifference towards, women of the lower stratum of their tribe or village.

In contrast, tribes from the lower stratum have low school enrollment rates and high dropout rates. Their children hardly move beyond the primary level. Hence, they are constrained to work as construction labourers, domestic servants, cart pullers, scrap collectors, vendors, etc. In this struggle for survival, women make a valuable contribution and face considerable hardships. Yet their role and participation under these difficult conditions is hardly recognized. Further, due to such struggles, daughters are forced to discontinue their studies and go out to earn a living to supplement the family income. In towns, women develop a heightened sense of insecurity and dependence. Indeed, often their fathers, husbands, or brothers decide matters concerning their work and wages. Often, such decisions taken by the men are challenged if they are taken without consulting the women or at lower wage rates (Punalekar 1988: 94–102). Sachchidananda shows that educated Hos in white-collar jobs in recent years aspire for homebound wives as a marker of higher social status. This ultimately has lowered the status of women (Sachchidananda 1988: 84).

The discussion of bride price also reveals glimpses into the kinds of changes taking place, especially among the richer sections of tribal society. The rich among some tribal communities of Arunachal Pradesh have been using the traditional practice of bride price for their own sexual aggrandizement (Nongbri 1998; Mann 1988). There has also been a shift from bride price to dowry among the educated and salaried sections of some tribes (Misra 1984: 107; Kishwar 1987: 151).

#### Tribal Movements

Tribal studies have moved in many directions, with the major focus currently on development issues and tribal movements. However, the study of women in tribal society has remained confined to a discussion either of status or of inequality. One of the most important features of tribal studies has been the study of tribal movements. Besides contributing to ethnography, the studies of tribal movements have given rise to certain kinds of generalizations or conceptualizations about such movements. One of the general concerns in the study of tribal movements in India has been to provide a system of classification. Generally, tribal movements have been classified on the basis of factors such as geographical distribution,

chronology, aims and objectives, and issues around forest, land, ethnicity, political autonomy, secession, mobility, and identity.

The study of movements from the perspective of social strata and class has, on the whole, been absent in the study of tribal movements. The reason for this is the assumption that there is no class differentiation in tribal society. However, in more recent writings, this aspect has received attention. Thus, in movements focused on political autonomy, the role of the educated middle class has increasingly been highlighted. Similarly, in movements that were launched in the nineteenth and the early twentieth centuries, the role of religious leaders or leaders who claimed to be incarnations of god has been examined (MacDougall 1985; Singh 1966). The leadership of the movement in general has also been noted. In the early phase of the movement, that is the period 1795–1860, most leaders came from the upper sections of society; in the phase after 1860, most leaders came from the lowest rungs of society (Datta-Ray 1983; Singh 1983; Shah 1982). Yet in all these studies, an an account of the role of women has been conspicuous by its absence. Paradoxically, this is the case even in forestand agrarian-based movements, which had a greater bearing on the lives of women compared to men. This is not to say that there has been no reference whatsoever of women's role in these movements. Studies of the Tebhaga movement of 1946–47 and the agrarian- and forest-based movements launched by Jharkhand Mukti Morcha (JMM) and Marxist Coordination Committee (MCC) in Jharkhand in the 1970s provide descriptions of women's participation in these movements. Women's participation involved engaging in activities such as forcible harvesting and stacking of crops in their courtyards, keeping watch on trespassers into the village, i.e. the police and the military, attacking the police when they came to arrest leaders, and providing housing, food, and information to members of the underground (Cooper 1988; Singh Roy 1992: 54–60; Sahu 1996: 88). Women's participation was also seen in protest movements against forest contractors and forest officers. Women leaders played a significant role in these activities (Sahu 1996: 108). They have invariably formed a very significant part of various grassroots organizations campaigning for issues such as equal wages, right to work, and campaigns against alcoholism and other social evils. Women's participation was not confined to such

movements alone but was also evident in movements such as resistance or rebellion against colonial rule and the demand for autonomy from India or within India. In the case of the former, there have been references to the participation by Santhal women in various resistance movements that were launched by them from the third quarter of the eighteenth century to the first quarter of the twentieth century. In the Santhal rebellion of 1855, of the 25,000 people who had gathered at the Bhagnadihi ground, about half were women and children. Women also marched to Calcutta along with their male partners with a view to placing their grievance before the governor. They suffered military torture and molestation when their men plunged into direct action against the British. Many of them took up native arms and fought against the British until death (Sahu 1996: 105). In addition to their participation in the above struggles, especially the Santhal rebellion and the Birsa movement, the role of tribal women in the peasant and workers' movements of the 1960s and 1970s has also been highlighted (Mitra 1984: 80–90).<sup>4</sup> There have also been some descriptions of women leaders of some movements, such as Rani Gaidinliu and Rajmohini Devi. Gaidinliu, who led an anti-colonial struggle among the Nagas, has been a source of inspiration to thousands of her followers. Similarly, Rajmohini Devi of Sarguja (now in Chhattisgarh) tried, in the early 1950s, to wean the Gond tribesmen away from liquor and magical practices and to impart to them some form of ethical religion. She established an organization called the Bapu Dharm Sabha Adivasi Mandal to this end (Roy Burman 1988: 11–12). However, gender issues in their activities and programmes remain unaddressed in most studies.

## Economic and Political Development

In the post-independence period, various provisions have been made by the state for the protection and upliftment of tribes. The benefits under these provisions have been distributed very unevenly across the tribes. Within the tribes too, distribution is very uneven along the line of sex. This is reflected in the negligible presence of tribal women in educational institutions, government and semi-government jobs, and institutions of governance. The female literacy rate among tribes as per the 1991 Census was 18.2 per cent as against 29.6 for men. The data for other sectors along the line of sex are

not easily forthcoming. The data that we have for the north-eastern states are quite revealing.

| State                | Primary sector |      | Secondary sector |     | Tertiary sector |      |
|----------------------|----------------|------|------------------|-----|-----------------|------|
|                      | M              | F    | M                |     | M               |      |
| Arunachal<br>Pradesh | 54.6           | 89.9 | 12.3             | 2.2 | 33.1            | 7.9  |
| Meghalaya            | 69.5           | 83.8 | 5.0              | 1.5 | 25.4            | 14.7 |
| Mizoram              | 58.1           | 78.3 | 7.2              | 1.8 | 34.7            | 199  |
| Nagaland             | 63.3           | 92.1 | 5.1              | 1.2 | 31.6            | 6.7  |

**Table 10.1:** Percentage Distribution of Workers by Sex

Source: Women in India: A Statistical Profile, Planning Commission, 2000.

The above data clearly point to the fact that there is a bias against women in the values and social structures of tribal societies, especially in the domain of politics. To ensure the participation of tribes in the decision-making process, seats were reserved for them in Parliament and the state assemblies (lower houses only) for a period of ten years initially, but this has been extended until a date under a constitutional amendment. The participation of tribes in the political process has been studied at various levels, ranging from local self-government bodies, such as panchayats and district councils, to state legislatures and Parliament. Yet the participation of women in these bodies has been negligible, if not altogether absent. Women's membership of state legislatures is a case in point. In Arunachal Pradesh, only one seat was held by a woman out of the total number of 59 seats. The corresponding figures were three out of 57 for Meghalaya, zero out of 40 for Mizoram, and zero out of 60 for Nagaland (Planning Commission 2000).

As mentioned above, women have remained handicapped in almost all sectors of social and economic life. In addition, they have been constrained to work under depressing conditions. They have not only been exposed to greater hardships and difficulties due to depletion of resources (land, forest, water), both at the levels of the household and the community, but also to greater danger due to the changing nature of work and livelihood. Women often walk long distances to collect fuel and to draw water for households

or fields. The strategy of coping with such situations and the lack of alternative modes of livelihood have led to large-scale migration of tribal men and women to distant places, even to urban centres, in search of employment. When only men migrate, women have had to bear the burden of taking care of the farm in addition to their usual responsibilities.

The constitutional provisions have affected men and women differently in tribal societies. Nongbri locates these effects within a concrete situation of state action, viz. the Supreme Court ban on timber logging and its implications for the tribal women of the north-eastern region. She points out that this ban has resulted in increasing women's already enormous economic and domestic responsibilities, imposing an additional burden on them. She argues that the ban threatens women's traditional rights to land and forest, and also reinforces their marginalization from the management of their natural productive resources (Nongbri 2001: 1898–1899). Fernandes and Menon express similar views on the impact of the depletion of natural resources on women, who cannot easily find fuelwood, water, fodder, and, in certain cases, even the daily requirements for food (Fernandes and Menon 1987; Menon 1993: 350).

#### Emerging Discourse

Tribal communities in India are enormously diverse and heterogeneous, differing widely with regard to language, physical characteristics, demographic traits, means of livelihood, and cultural exposure to the wider world. They are, in fact, more heterogeneous than the larger Indian population if caste were excluded from consideration. The People of India project conducted under the auspices of the Anthropological Survey of India enumerated 461 tribal communities, of which 174 have been identified as sub-groups. Hence, the traditional treatment and position of women among different tribes differs, with considerable variations in their roles and activities, rights and privileges. At the same time, women continue to be governed by customary laws and norms. The data that we have on gender in tribal societies are sketchy, especially in the context of recent changes in these societies. Given such heterogeneity, it is difficult to generalise about the position of women as a whole across tribal groups in

India. What has been observed can at best be described as being illustrative and heuristic.

Despite such heterogeneity, tribes share one trait in common, that is, they are different from the dominant community of the region, whose members have always been seen as aliens and outsiders. This is seen most clearly in situations where groups identified as tribes are engaged in intense competition and conflict with the dominant regional community, or even with those from outside the dominant community. In north-east India, such conflict resulted not only in the creation of tribal states but also led to an exodus of the non-tribal population from the sub-region. Such conflict still prevails, especially in states or regions where non-tribes still form a significant population. In the rest of India, this is seen most clearly in Jharkhand than in any other region. Outsiders here are invariably described as exploiters and oppressors, and are addressed by terms such as *diku.* In Meghalaya, *dakhar*, a very strong term, is used for outsiders, but carries to a lesser degree the connotations of exploiters and oppressors. In a social arrangement such as this, tribal societies have been experiencing a serious threat to their identity on account of the kinds of changes taking place. There has been a steady erosion of their life-support system based on land and forest. There has been increasing pauperization of the majority of tribes. There is a loss of language. There is a danger of the tribes becoming a minority in their own land. Given all these conditions, the construction of identity and community has been moving in different directions. In all these processes, tradition and customary law, and hence even gender, play a pivotal role in the context of tribal societies.

This has led to an interesting discussion on gender issues in tribal societies with far- reaching consequences for women's freedom, on the one hand, and the issue of equality, on the other hand, especially concerning property rights in land. The problem concerning the above two issues revolves around three points. One concerns tribal tradition. The second relates to transfer of tribal land from tribes to non-tribes. The third concerns the use of the provision of reservation by children born of inter-tribe marriage. It hardly needs to be mentioned that the last has emerged from the encounter of tribes with non-tribes.

One of the most important changes in tribal society is the large-scale alienation of tribal land from tribes to non-tribes. Several studies have pointed to the massive land dispossession that took place during the British period. This process has been accelerated during the post-independence phase of development despite the adoption of the Land Transfer Regulation in states with large tribal populations. Tribal land has passed from tribes to non-tribes in a variety of ways, mostly through fraud and deceit.

One of the ways by which non-tribals acquire tribal land is by marrying tribal women. In view of the fact that there is a restriction on the alienation of land from tribes to non-tribes, such methods have become fairly popular in areas like Jharkhand. Singh refers to the high incidence of alienation of tribal land through marriage with tribal women among the Hos of Singhbhum (Singh 1988: 3). Tribal women entering such marriages are not only seen as aligning with the *dikus* but also as acting as conduits of land transfer from tribes to non-tribes. This is an emotive issue among the tribes in view of the long struggle that they have waged against the alienation of tribal land. Coupled with this is the wider issue of tribal demography. Tribes in their own territory or locality are increasingly shrinking in numbers, with far-reaching economic and political implications. In the process, their survival as a group or community is at stake. Hence, anything that tends to jeopardize their land and population is regarded with a great deal of concern and anxiety. This explains the opposition against women marrying outsiders, especially those considered *diku*.

Related to this concern is the issue of reservation. There has been a general tendency among the families of mixed (inter-tribe) marriages to take advantage of reservation extended for the benefit of tribes. This trend is indeed problematic. Should children born of a tribal mother and a nontribal father be considered tribal or non-tribal? The question has two aspects. One is legal and the other is socio-cultural. After all, even tribe as a legal category in the form of the scheduled tribe has a socio-cultural basis. Both these aspects are problematic in the case of mixed families. As per the customary law of the community described as a scheduled tribe, lineage is invariably patrilineal, which makes the status of children of mixed marriages problematic. Even if they were to take their mother's totemic title and seek to take advantage of the legal provisions provided for tribes, they

would still be contravening customary law. The opposition against women marrying non-tribals is compounded by the weight of tribal tradition, according to which marriage outside the community is regarded a crime as serious as incest.

An equally interesting discourse in tribal society is over the issue of women's property rights, particularly inheritance. A section of tribal society is in favour of property rights in land for women despite resistance to the same in the name of custom and tradition. In Jharkhand, for example, it is argued that as per tribal tradition, there is no individual ownership of land. Rather, the tradition there is that of the *khuntkatti* system, in which land is invariably held on the basis of lineage and hence property belongs to no one individual. Hence the question of extending ownership rights in land to women does not arise. Nevertheless, it is interesting to note Singh's observation on this matter. A higher sex ratio among the Ho tribe accounts for a large number of unmarried women. A number of them claimed their customary right to maintenance, which was often questioned by their male agnates. Singh, as the commissioner of Chhotanagpur, disposed of a large number of cases regarding the right of Ho women to maintenance according to custom (Singh 1988: 3). A similar articulation of identity is also evident in a matrilineal society like the Khasis. However, among the Khasis the issue of ethnic identity is raised along with the demand for changes in the kinship system, viz. the role of kinship and the rules of inheritance (Nongbri 1998, 2000). Resistance to the demand for women's property rights is also related to the economics of land size. It is argued that women's entitlement to land rights will lead to further subdivision and fragmentation of already subdivided and fragmented land in Jharkhand, and hence will have implications for farm efficiency and viability.

Issues such as these pose a problem for a woman as an individual and a citizen, on the one hand, and as a member of a community, on the other hand. As an individual and as a citizen, a woman is entitled to the provision of human rights as well as citizenship, which guarantee the individual the right to freedom. Yet human rights as well as rights under the Indian Constitution also make provision for the protection and safeguarding of tribal interests on the ground of tribes being either a minority or an oppressed social group or community. Adopting either one or the other

position can only be taken at the risk of being accused of ignoring or overlooking the other dimension of the problem. This stance is sure to be more problematic for non-tribal scholars or activists than it is for tribals. The problem has to be resolved from within, and none other than by the tribal people themselves.

#### References

- Bose, P. K. 1984. *Classes and Class Relations Among Tribes of Bengal*. Delhi: Ajanta Books International.
- Cooper, Adrienne. 1988. *Sharecropping and Sharecroppers' Struggles in Bengal, 1930–1950*. Calcutta: K. P. Bagchi & Co.
- Chauhan, Abha. 1990. *Tribal Women and Social Change in India*. Etawah: A. C. Brothers.

Elwin, Verrier. 1961. *Nagaland.* Shillong: Research Department, Adviser's Secretariat.

———. 1986. *Baigas*. Delhi: Gyan Publications.

Fernandes, Walter and Geeta Menon. 1987. *Tribal Women and Forest Economy: Deforestation, Exploitation and Social Change*. New Delhi: Indian Social Institute.

Furer-Haimendorf, Christoph von. 1933. *Naked Nagas*. Calcutta: Thacker, Spink & Co.

- Ghurye, G. S. 1963. *The Scheduled Tribes*. Bombay: Popular Prakashan.
- Gupta, R. K. 1979. 'Witchcraft Murders in the Duars', in J. Troisi (ed.), *The Santhals: Readings in Tribal Life,* Vol. 1*: Religion and Magic*. New Delhi: Indian Social Institute, pp. 265–75.
- Hutton, John Henry. 1921. *The Sema Nagas*. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- Kelhou, 1998. 'Women in Angami Society', in L. Zehol (ed.), *Women in Naga Society*. New Delhi: Regency Publications, pp. 51–61.
- Kelkar, G. and Dev Nathan. 1993. 'Women's Land Rights and Witches', in M. Miri (ed.), *Continuity and Change in Tribal Society*. Shimla: IIAS, pp. 109–118.
- Kishwar, Madhu. 1987. 'Toiling without Rights', *Economic and Political Weekly* 22 (3): 95–101; 22 (4): 149–55; and 22 (5): 194–99.
- MacDougall, John. 1985. *Land or Religion: The Sardar and Kherwar Movements in Bihar, 1858 1885*. New Delhi: Manohar.
- Mandelbaum, D. G. 1970. *Society in India*. Bombay: Popular Prakashan.
- Mann, K. 1987. *Tribal Women in a Changing Society*. Delhi: Mittal Publications.
- ———. 1988. 'Bride-Price in Tribal North-East India', in J. P. Singh, N. Vyas, and R. S. Manu (eds.), Tribal Women and Development. Jaipur: Rawat Publications, pp. 169–78.
- ———. 1996. *Tribal Women on the Threshold of Twenty-first Century*. New Delhi: M. D. Publications.
- Menon, G. 1993. 'Tribal Women: The Ignored Sector in the Development Debate', in M. Miri (ed.), *Continuity and Change in Tribal Society*. Shimla: IIAS, pp. 350–53.
- Misra, P. K. 1984. 'From Bride-Price to Dowry', in K. S. Singh (ed.), *Economies of the Tribes and Their Transformation*. Delhi: Concept Publishing Company.