- Scheid, V. (1995). Transformation of the non-substantial: Developing traditional medicine in contemporary China. Paper presented at the Lu Gwei-djen Memorial Workshop on Innovation in Chinese Medicine. Needham Research Institute, Cambridge, U.K., March 1995.
- Shih, C.-K. (1993). The Yongning Moso: Sexual Union, household organization, gender and ethnicity in a matrilineal duolocal society in Southwest China. Doctoral dissertation, Stanford University.
- Shih, C.-K. (1998). Mortuary rituals and symbols among the Moso. In M. Oppitz & E. Hsu (Eds.), *Naxi and Moso Ethnography* (pp. 103–125). Zurich: Volkerkundemuseum Zurich.
- Shih, C.-K. (2001). Genesis of marriage among the Moso. *Journal of Asian Studies, 60*, 381–412.
- Sivin, N. (1987). *Traditional medicine in contemporary China*. Ann Arbor: Center for Chinese Studies, University of Michigan.
- Unschuld, P. U. (1985). *Medicine in China: A history of ideas*. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Walsh, E. R. (2001a). The Mosuo—Beyond the myths of matriarchy: Gender transformation and economic development. Doctoral dissertation, Temple University.
- Walsh, E. R. (2001b). Living with the myth of matriarchy: The Mosuo and tourism. In T. Chee-Beng, S. C. H. Cheung, & T. Hui (Eds.). *Anthropology, Tourism, and Chinese Society*. Bankok: White Lotus Press, 93–124.
- Weng, N. (1993). The Mother House: The symbolism and practice of gender among the Naze in Southwest China. Doctoral dissertation, University of Rochester.

- White, S. D. (1993). Medical discourses, Naxi Identities, and the state: Transformations in socialist China. Doctoral dissertation, University of California, Berkeley.
- White, S. D. (1997). Fame and sacrifice: The gendered construction of Naxi identities. *Modern China, 23*(3), 298–327.
- White, S. D. (1998a). State discourses, minority policies, and the politics of identity in the Lijiang Naxi People's autonomous county. *Nationalism and Ethnic Politics, 4*(1&2), 9–27.
- White, S. D. (1998b). From "barefoot doctor" to "village doctor" in Tiger Springs Village: A case study of rural health care transformations in Socialist China. *Human Organization, 57*(4), 480–490.
- White, S. D. (1999). Deciphering "integrated western and chinese medicine" in the rural Lijiang Basin: State policy and local practice(s) in Socialist China. *Social Science and Medicine, 49*(10), 1333–1347.
- White, S. D. (2001). Medicines and modernities in Socialist China: Medical pluralism, Naxi identities, and the state in the Lijiang Basin. In L. H. Connor & G. Samuel (Eds.), *Healing powers: Traditional medicine, shamanism, and science in contemporary Asia* (pp. 171–194). Westport, CT: Bergin & Garvey.
- Yan, R. (1982). A living fossil of the family—A study of the Naxi nationality in the Lugu Lake Region. *Social Sciences in China, 3*(4), 60–83.

# **Malagasy**

#### **Janice Harper**

## **ALTERNATIVE NAMES**

The people of Madagascar are known collectively as the Malagasy. This chapter is based on fieldwork conducted among the Malagasy living in the southeastern forests of Madagascar who are ethnically identified as both Tanala and Betsileo. Although treated as comparative and mutually exclusive ethnic groups, such social groupings are misleading. Tanala ("People of the Forests") is a performative identity; those who live in the forests and engage in the forest economy are "Tanala," whereas Betsileo is an administrative division of the pre-colonial Merina autocracy. Hence, for many living in the southeastern forests of Madagascar, Betsileo represents one's ancestry, while Tanala represents one's contemporary social identity. Moreover, ethnic identification is problematic because those so labeled do not necessarily think of themselves in terms of ethnicity, as much as they do in terms of ancestry or lineage. For further discussions on ethnicity in Madagascar in general, see Astuti (1995), Bloch (1989), Kottak (1971a), and Larson (1996, 2000). For further discussion of the Betsileo, see Dubois (1938) and Kottak (1971b, 1980), and on the Tanala see Beaujard (1983). For further discussion on lineage and ethnicity among the Tanala and Betsileo of the Ranomafana region, see Hanson (1997) and Harper (2002).

## **LOCATION AND LINGUISTIC AFFILIATION**

Madagascar is the fourth largest island of the world, lying like a teardrop in the Indian Ocean, just off the coast of southeast Africa, approximately 400 km from

#### **Overview of the Culture 795**

Mozambique. This geographical isolation from the main continent has contributed to its unique ecological biodiversity, as the island's flora and fauna have evolved independently from the rest of Africa. Despite its ecological diversity, the country is notable for its relative linguistic and cultural uniformity. The official language is Malagasy, originating from a Malayo-Polynesian language, and most, but not all, dialects are mutually understandable, despite significant grammatical differences. Many educated Malagasy also speak French, although this language is rarely spoken or understood in rural villages.

## **OVERVIEW OF THE CULTURE**

Madagascar was first settled by Indonesian and Bantu seafarers in approximately AD 600. Although this human habitation is frequently noted as the chief cause of environmental degradation, less noted is the rich human diversity that has evolved from this settlement. There are now over 15 million Malagasy living on the island, half of whom are under the age of 18, and most of whom live in extreme poverty.

This poverty is related, in part, to the island's geography. A long mountainous terrain extends vertically down the center of the island, making agriculture and transportation particularly difficult in many parts of the island. Thus, agricultural lands, transportation of goods to and from major markets, and access to urban social services, are limited for many of the residents.

Pryor (1990) estimates that due to this topography, along with soil degradation, only 4% of the island is under cultivation. Nonetheless, agriculture comprises up to a third of the country's GDP, employs over three quarters of its labor force, and is the major source of its exports. The principal crops include rice, coffee, vanilla, sugar, spices, cotton, and tobacco. Up to half of the land is irrigated, although swidden agriculture (known as "*tavy*") is practiced extensively, particularly in the forests of the southeast, where *tavy* rice production is regarded by many as the principal cause of deforestation.

In addition to crop production, livestock and seafood contribute to important sources of domestic and international trade. The industrial sector includes food processing, clothing, textiles, soap-making, mining, petroleum refining, paper production, and tanning. More recently, efforts have been made to expand the island's service economy, most notably in ecotourism, but this objective is constrained by poor infrastructure, limited public transport and, in more remote areas, few hotels.

Despite its rich resource base, GNP per capita is approximately \$250.00 annually; many have incomes far below this figure, although non-formal economic strategies are practiced widely to augment incomes. This poverty is related not only to the geographical constraints limiting agricultural production and transport, but also to a history of domination and exploitation that have contributed to present social divisions and marginalization.

Madagascar was colonized by the French from 1896 to 1960. Prior to colonization, however, a precolonial highland autocracy was established in the late 18th century, known as the Merina Empire. During the reign of the Merina, land was appropriated by the state, forced-labor of men was instituted, taxes imposed, and debtors or their families sold into domestic slavery. These objectives were facilitated by bestowing gifts, titles, and lands on indigenous leaders or others who would promote allegiance to the empire, a policy that furthered state aims to forge ethnic identities. Although the forging of a Merina ethnic identity was effective in the highlands (see Larson, 2000), the empire was never to gain authority over more than a third of the island. Nonetheless, a complex social hierarchy emerged (in varying respects) throughout the island, in which people were categorized not only in terms of ethnic affiliations, but in terms of caste as well, as they became identified as *andriana* (noble), *hova* (free), and *andevo* (slave). Moreover, within these categories there existed a range of social status. These social identities are no longer formally recognized, but they remain as significant markers of identity and status, contributing to contemporary social relations which Campbell (1985) suggests are best understood as impermeable categories of caste (see Bloch [1989] for further discussion on social rank).

Thus, ancestry and lineage are prominent in Malagasy culture as a means of establishing one's history and place in society. Kinship is generally bilateral, with one's ancestry traced through both the mother and the father. In most rural areas, where indigenous cultural practices are strongest, patrilocal residence patterns are the rule, though individual exceptions are common. Women have rights to land, including constitutional provisions (based on indigenous practice) of one-third inheritance. Women are active in decision-making, and men take an active part in child rearing (some areas, such as the southern Antandroy, are more patriarchal than others).

Throughout the 19th century, Lutheran and Catholic missionaries were active in the industrialization of the island, as well as the education of children, becoming exceptionally successful at converting Malagasy to Christianity. Thus, Protestantism, Catholicism, and indigenous belief systems continue to coexist and have fostered pluralistic belief systems that are particularly notable in the indigenous medical system.

By the end of the 19th century, the Merina Empire was replaced by French colonial rule, which replicated in many respects the strategies of the precolonial autocracy, including continued forced labor, taxation, land appropriation, and indirect rule through indigenous power structures. In addition, the French promoted a shift from subsistence agriculture to cash crop production, most notably in coffee, vanilla, and pineapple, with uneven success temporally and geographically. Although French occupation was noted for its intrusive control over the land and people of Madagascar, some practices had favorable results. For example, in an effort to augment the labor pool, maternal and neonatal hospitals were introduced in the early 20th century, which provided biomedical health services to women and infants. In order to limit the spread of infectious disease, manufactured pharmaceuticals were provided, in many cases, gratuitously. These and other health services contributed to improved health status and declining mortality rates, while compulsory education in the French language enabled many people to compete for administrative positions.

The oppressive nature of the colonial government, which was most characterized by its forceful rule over agricultural production and cultural practices, culminated in a peaceful transition to independence in 1960, followed by a period known as The First Republic, led by Philippe Tsiranana. Covell (1987) indicates that this period was effectively rule by a government of minority elites selected and supported by the colonial government, which continued to exert its influence throughout the decade. By 1975, however, the Second Republic was instituted when Didier Ratsiraka took power through a military coup, and promoted nationalist ideals including educating children in the public schools exclusively in the Malagasy language, banning foreign ownership of property, and drastically limiting foreign trade. Ratsiraka's rule was based on a Marxist-Lenninist economic philosophy, advocating public ownership of the primary means of production, and conversion of expropriated lands to agricultural co-operatives. At the same time, he borrowed heavily from the world market to finance poorly conceived national industries that failed to succeed, including soy and flour mills, despite the fact that the Malagasy do not produce soy or wheat. Consequently, notwithstanding his proclaimed resistance to foreign influence, Madagascar became the first socialist country to accept the economic liberalization criteria of the IMF. Structural adjustment policies included the continual devaluation of the Malagasy franc (including by nearly half in 1987), drastic cuts in the social sector such as health care and education, and privatization of industry, banking, and other financial institutions. These policies were aimed at expanding foreign economic investment in the country, but caused rapid inflation, severely limited access to biomedical health care, and contributed to the decline of educational standards in the rural areas (see Hewitt, 1992 on structural adjustment in Madagascar).

Ratsiraka's reign over the people collapsed following the massacre of peaceful demonstrators outside his palace in 1991. In 1993 physician Albert Zafy was democratically elected as president, but by 1996 he was impeached for abuse of power and Ratsiraka elected to return to office, this time as a "humanist ecologist," calling for international investment in the country's ecological resources. The island's species diversity has led it to be regarded as one of the world's "biodiversity hotspots," drawing considerable international aid and attention to its endangered flora and fauna, most notably the many species of lemur that exist no place else on earth.

In 2001, Ratsiraka lost a bid for re-election when the self-made millionaire mayor of Antananarivo, Marc Ravalomanana, narrowly defeated him. When Ratsiraka refused to concede defeat and declared martial law, mass protests ensued, leading to an economic paralysis of the country. A recount of the electoral results was ordered, and Ravalomanana was sworn in as president in May of 2002. The African Union refused to accept the presidency as legitimate and suspended Madagascar from the African Union, leading to a new election in December of 2002. When Ravalomanana clearly won a majority of the votes in the second election, Madagascar was reinstated into the African Union. Ravalomanana has made reducing poverty and inequalities in the distribution of wealth priorities of his presidency, and has continued to endorse the goals of environmental conservation. Toward these efforts, he has called for increasing attention to ecological tourism as a strategy toward economic self-sufficiency among the Malagasy.

## **THE CONTEXT OF HEALTH: ENVIRONMENTAL, ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND POLITICAL FACTORS**

While the health of the island's lemurs and other endangered species receive frequent attention in the media and scientific literature, UNICEF (2002) reports that more than half of the population does not have access to safe water (including 15% in urban areas and 69% in rural areas), 40% of infants are moderately to severely underweight, and the infant mortality rate is 95 per 1,000 births, or nearly 10% (with far higher rates in rural areas). For every 100 children born who do live, more than 15 will die before their fifth birthday. For those who survive, life is likely to be short, for life expectancy at birth is a mere 54 years (New Africa 2001).

Illnesses include malaria, which is particularly prevalent in the rural areas, and has been increasing over the last two decades. This increase followed a 20-year decline in malaria, when an eradication campaign begun in 1948 proved to be very effective. Unfortunately, the effectiveness of the campaign led to decreased resistance to the disease. Hence, its return has been particularly devastating, as many Malagasy who cannot withstand the disease die. The United States Library of Congress (2001) reports that in 1985, 6,500 Malagasy died of malaria, increasing to 11,000 by 1987. The decreased resistance to the disease is further exacerbated by increasing malnutrition and parasitical disease.

Parasitical diseases include schistosomiasis (associated with the lack of safe drinking water and inadequate sewage), and chronic infestations of a variety of worms. Kightlinger (1993) found that 97% of residents of the Ranomafana National Park region in the southeastern region of the island were infested with multiple parasites. Other illnesses of concern in Madagascar include tuberculosis, leprosy, cholera, brucellosis, yellow fever, and bubonic plague. Of even greater concern was the prevalence of respiratory disorders and what appeared to be hepatitis. Respiratory disorders prevailed among children and women, and were probably related to both the rapid transmission of infectious disease in the closed quarters of local housing (with five to ten people sharing one to two bedroom houses no bigger than 10 by 20 ft), and the common practice of women cooking over wood burning fires inside their homes with only a tiny window and door for ventilation. In the village where I resided, several adults, both men and women, died following short illnesses that were locally diagnosed as *fefy*, *tazovony*, or *albumen*. Though having subtle differential diagnostic criteria, each of these illnesses included dark urine, yellowed skin, and swollen abdomens, suggesting that they were probably associated with hepatitis.

Malagasy are the world's greatest rice lovers, consuming more rice per capita than any other population in the world. *Tavy* rice is particularly nutritious, providing substantial protein and vitamins. The typical diet in the rice-growing regions includes two to three meals of rice per day, usually with some form of sauce (*laoka*), typically made of boiled greens. On occasion, rice is consumed with beans and, rarely, beef, pork, or chicken. Protein is also obtained from small fish caught in the irrigated fields, grubs and insects from the forest, and crayfish and eels caught in the rivers. Endangered species, such as tenrec, are also eaten, though consumption of these animals is not common, and more a matter of necessity than choice. Wild boar are also hunted and consumed occasionally. Manioc, cassava, boiled green bananas, and pineapple are additional staples of the forest diet. Beverages include coffee, rice tea, and *toaka gasy*, a locally distilled rum. Tobacco is chewed, primarily by women, as a means of curbing the appetite.

Malnutrition, however, is chronic, and exacerbates other health concerns such as malaria and respiratory problems. During my 14-month residency in a village adjacent to the Ranomafana National Park (1995–96), I witnessed the deaths of 18 men, women, and children (from a population of approximately 180). Of these, several were of small children who were extremely underweight for their ages (see Harper, 2002 for a detailed account of the death of a malnourished child). Villagers reported that in the ambiguously defined past, greater cooperation and exchange enabled less fortunate residents to remain well fed. As economic security declined, there was less willingness to provide food and cash to others, including close relatives. As a result, it was not uncommon to find weakened infants fed only breast-milk and watery rice while their healthier age mates received more substantial diets. Adults, as well, suffered from malnutrition, undoubtedly exacerbated by parasitical diseases, affecting both men and women.

## **MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS**

A wide spectrum of medical practitioners can be found in Madagascar, but access to western biomedical practitioners, medicines, facilities, and technologies remains extremely limited to most Malagasy, particularly in the rural areas. Indigenous medical practitioners include *ombiasa* (shamans), who may generalize or specialize (in single illnesses, types of illness, or certain diagnostic or divination techniques), birthing specialists, herbalists, bonesetters, and veterinarians.

*Ombiasa* may be either men or women, though men are more common. The *ombiasa* may be trained from childhood, often learning the craft from his/her parent, or may assume the profession in adulthood. In the case of the latter, it is not uncommon that one's failure to have become an *ombiasa* as intended by the ancestors leads to illness. Upon diagnosis, the *marary* (sick person) accepts the mantle of *ombiasa*, learns the craft through spirit possession ceremonies and the assistance of an elder *ombiasa*, and becomes healed. More common, however, is the apprenticeship of the children or grandchildren of *ombiasa*. From childhood on, the apprentice is taught local medicines, diagnostic techniques, and ceremonial customs.

Diagnostic techniques may be limited to evaluation of physical symptoms, such as skin eruptions, and the prescription and preparation of local plant medicines. When such treatment fails, or the symptom constellation does not conform to a known illness category, or to an illness category regarded as originating in the environment, then other diagnostic techniques are employed to determine the source and treatment of the illness. Such techniques may include divination by mirror, water, seed, or sand. Linton (1933) indicated that divination by water was rare among the Tanala; my own fieldwork indicated that it was very common, perhaps because it was more easily learned by younger *ombiasa* than the more elaborate form of divination by seed, *sikidy* (see Linton, 1933 for a detailed account of *sikidy*). Less common is divination by sand, which involves pouring sand on a wooden tray and making marks in it with a stick.

*Ombiasa* also consult the ancestors through spirit possession ceremonies. They may either invite the ancestor to possess them, and thus, serve as a conduit through which the ancestor communicates to the living, or they may direct the possession of others. It is common for non*ombiasa* to become possessed of spirits during such ceremonies, in which large numbers of participants may become possessed. (For ethnographic detail and analysis on spirit possession, see Sharp, 1993, 1994.)

More commonly, individuals with no particular professional standing may specialize in the treatment of a single disease or type of illness, such as an elder woman noted for being *mahay fanafody zazakely* (knowledgeable about children's medicines). Knowledge of a particular indigenous medicine may also be passed from generation to generation, such as a famed recipe for a measles vaccine made from local plants and chicken parts that I witnessed dispensed to children annually in the Ranomafana region. In many cases, men are the guardians of such knowledge, while women bring with them a more pluralistic medical strategy. This may be because the great variety of ecological niches in Madagascar have created differing native pharmacopoeia. In patrilocal settings, men are able to pass on to their sons the knowledge of their local indigenous medicines, while women, coming from other ecological zones, may bring with them broader knowledge of treating common health concerns. Thus, women's knowledge may be more generalized and innovative, while men's knowledge may reflect greater depth of the local pharmacopoeia available to them.

## **CLASSIFICATION OF ILLNESS, THEORIES OF ILLNESS, AND TREATMENT OF ILLNESS**

While there is a wide range of understandings about illness classification and causation, illnesses tend to be classified as illnesses of God (*Zanahary*), illnesses of the environment, illnesses sent by the ancestors, those caused by witchcraft, and ghost or spirit illnesses. These categories are not mutually exclusive. For example, an ancestor can be displeased, and so send an illness of the environment, such as malaria (*tazo*—fever). It is understood that some illnesses are caused through infection, others through contagion, and still others through interactions with the environment. Nonetheless, if the illness is believed caused by acts of the ancestors, ghosts (*biby*), spirits (of which there are a variety), or witchcraft (*mosavy*), treatment of the symptoms will only lead to the recurrence of the disorder, or the onset of another health problem.

Malaria is prevalent and understood to be brought by mosquitoes. As an illness of the environment, treatment through pharmaceutical medication is preferable, but if not available, teas made from bitter plants are administered. *Hazomafaika* is the tea of choice in this case, but if it is not available, other bitter substances will be substituted. The concept of bitter is clearly associated with fevers, and in some cases over-consumption of bitter substances (such as unsweetened coffee) may be believed to *cause* the fever. When a child falls ill with malaria and

#### **Sexuality and Reproduction 799**

dies, it is generally believed to be the cause of an illness of the environment or of God; if an adult falls seriously ill, it is more likely that other origins of the disease will be considered, such as witchcraft. If several family members fall ill or meet with misfortune, ancestral displeasure or witchcraft may be suspected, in which case, an *ombiasa* will determine the appropriate treatment.

*Tazo vony* (literally, "yellow fever"), *albumin*, and *fetsy* are diagnostic categories for illnesses associated with yellow palms, yellow eyes, dark urine, and swollen abdomens. Widespread disagreement exists among both *ombiasa* and lay people as to the causation and differential diagnoses of these three illness categories that probably represent hepatitis or other liver dysfunctions. Nonetheless, it was agreed that they were usually illnesses of God, and could not be cured by either indigenous medicines or by *fanafody vazaha* (medicine of foreigners).

*Aretina biby* ("ghost sickness") is often diagnosed when an illness is sudden, severe, and its symptom constellation does not correspond to any recognized illness category. Diagnosis is made by an *ombiasa*, and treatment, if successful, will require appeasing the offended ghost. *Biby* are considered so powerful, however, that treatment is often unsuccessful and the illness leads to death.

A classic example of an illness of the environment is *hantana* or scabies. *Hantana* is believed to be caused by poor hygiene and is very contagious; the prevalence of *hantana* in the village where I resided was so widespread that it was not even mentioned as a health concern, except when serious infections ensued. The treatment of choice is lindane, which is usually too expensive for most people. When unavailable, a number of plant medicines are used to make herbal infusions that are applied to the skin.

Mental illness is recognized, and the mentally ill are cared for and respected. In most cases I observed, mental illness was attributed to violation of a custom (*fomba*) on the part of the impaired person or his/her mother during pregnancy or while nursing. Ingestion of too much alcohol is believed to cause temporary madness, while smoking marijuana is believed to cause a person to become violent. It is also recognized that addiction to alcohol can occur, in which case the addicted ought never to drink again, corresponding in many ways to generalized views of alcoholism in the United States.

## **SEXUALITY AND REPRODUCTION**

Sexuality is accepted as a natural experience for both men and women, although the consequences of sex, such as pregnancy at a young age or vulnerability to sexually transmitted diseases, is taken seriously. Single mothers are not stigmatized, although recognition of their economic vulnerability discourages women from being single mothers if they can avoid it. Adultery of both men and women is common, though probably no more so than in the United States, and responses range from passive acceptance to divorce. Women are more likely to be stigmatized for adultery, and may lose their children due to it, while men may be required by local elders (the *fokonolona*—village-level council) to make restitution to their wives (such as providing her with cash or livestock). Homosexuality is practiced with discretion.

The ideal family size has varied throughout Madagascar's history. Prior to colonization, marriage was often in the mid to late-twenties, and family size relatively small (see Harper, 2002). Colonial policies aimed at increasing the labor-pool included taxing unmarried people and waiving forced labor for fathers of seven or more children. In addition, maternal hospitals were introduced to improve women's reproductive fitness. All but one of the elder women with whom I lived had given birth in the colonial hospitals; their daughters all gave birth on dirt floors in the home, as access to safe and hygienic biomedical care was very limited (the local hospital lacked both running water and electricity).

Infertility is a grave concern to both men and women, in large part due to the shortage of labor and social support that one would suffer if he or she had no children. An elaborate system of fosterage has developed in response to infertility, and it is not uncommon for Malagasy to adopt the children of their neighbors or kin.

Sexually transmitted diseases are common and have been increasing, and include gonorrhea, syphilis, trichomoniasis, and candidiasis (U.S. Library of Congress, 2001). While the World Health Organization reported that HIV/AIDS cases were so rare in 1993 that it ranked the country as having a 0.0 case rate, by 1997 this rate of HIV had increased to 0.12%, an estimate that USAID reports is probably due to underreporting. Moreover, the rate is expected to accelerate, due to the high rate of other STDs, which include a 35% rate among sex workers and 15% among pregnant women. USAID researchers have found that up to 82% of all women have had at least one sexually transmitted disease, and that in rural areas, 21% of pregnant women had active syphilis. In my own research in the southeastern forest region near the Ranomafana National Park, I found that women were commonly not informed of their husband's STD infections,

due to a belief that it was a "man's disease," that women without symptoms were not infected, and that men taking medication could not infect women.

## **HEALTH THROUGH THE LIFE CYCLE**

### **Pregnancy and Birth**

Birth control is commonly desired by both men and women, although birth spacing is regarded as more critical than curbing the number of children. Nonetheless, ineffective family planning campaigns which have provided only short-term supplies of birth control pills and/or no follow-up care, have led to resistance among Malagasy to participate in family planning campaigns. Concerns that have been expressed include the many side-effects associated with the pills, side-effects which people indicated were particularly aggravating to undernourished and chronically ill women. The use of contraceptive implants is of even greater concern, as follow up care is difficult to access, if it is provided at all.

Abortion is practiced, often with indigenous medicines, but it is highly stigmatized, particularly among those who have converted to Catholicism. Women have been known to accept birth-control pills from family planning agencies, which are then saved and dispensed discretely to women in need of abortions, who take several pills to induce spontaneous abortions.

Women often withhold public disclosure of their pregnancy, letting their swelling bellies announce the coming child. They continue to work up until they give birth if necessary, particularly if farming obligations find the woman hoping that she not go into labor until the harvest is in. When they are no longer able to work, their female friends and kin will assist them. When in labor, a woman is not expected to cry in pain. To do so would indicate weakness. Births usually take place in the home, on grass mats laid on dirt floors, with a fire burning in the home. Elder women assist, generally someone specialized in midwifery skills. When the child is born, it is washed and dressed, its head covered in a knit cap to protect it from entry of malevolent spirits (believed to enter through the fontanel). After it is dressed, it is shown to the crowd gathered outside the door, and quickly brought back inside. The birth of a girl is as joyously celebrated as the birth of a boy.

### **Infancy**

The new mother will stay with the child in the confines of the home for up to 2 months, venturing outside only to relieve herself. This period of confinement has been growing shorter and shorter, as women's agricultural work must be resumed and the heat of the home may become unbearable (with little or no ventilation or light). I heard several stories of new mothers becoming ill from ghost sickness, requiring them to terminate their confinement early, in order to appease the ghosts.

Women try, if possible, to give birth in their natal home. When this occurs, there will be a celebration to mark the departure of the child and mother from the village, before their return to the woman's marital residence.

Children are nursed into their second year. They are toilet trained at a young age, often less than a year when diapers are not available. The urine of a baby is considered benign and laughter is the usual response to a child urinating in the home or on an adult. Although women are the primary caretakers of children, brothers, fathers, and grandfathers are very active caregivers, and do not hesitate to hold or watch young infants or children when the mother is unavailable.

Children who are seriously ill or handicapped are loved and cared for, although I did witness several instances of serious neglect of very ill children, with considerable disagreement as to why they were neglected (see Harper, 2002).

Measles are a grave concern for young infants, as is possession by ghosts. *Ombiasa* prepare special amulets for protection. Chronic disorders, such as scabies and respiratory problems, are so ubiquitous that they do not cause much alarm. Indigenous medicines may or may not be used. When pharmaceutical medicines are available, they are used.

### **Childhood**

Children are well loved and cared for in Malagasy societies. Among the forest farmers of the southeastern region, childhood was a time of great joy, imaginative play, and hard work. Children learn at an early age to care for younger siblings, to help their parents with household chores, to labor in the fields, and to go to school. Learning the responsibilities and skills associated with rural living begins early. Children are taught to use large knives in many cases before they can even walk, and once

#### **Health through the Life Cycle 801**

walking, are quickly taught to master a multitude of household tasks. Gender distinctions are clear. Girls are taught to carry items on their heads and backs, building up their back muscles by carrying blocks of wood or small dolls, with the weight gradually increasing until they are able to carry an infant sibling by the age of 5 or 6. Girls also have small "tea parties," making small bowls and cups from leaves fastened together with bits of twig, and filled with various seeds, flowers, and leaves. And importantly, girls learn to help their mothers sort beans, and shake and pound rice, before the age of 3.

Boys' play includes various sporting activities such as fashioning a game of soccer from a grapefruit, or hunting for insects from the forest. Boys chop wood, harvest rice, and learn carpentry skills. They also assist in the care of their younger siblings and cooking if there are no older girls in the home.

Both boys and girls contribute to the household income when necessary by assisting in the rice fields (girls plant, weed, and harvest swidden rice, boys harvest both swidden and irrigated rice, and older boys may help prepare the rice fields). One very common way for children to earn extra income for the household or meals for themselves is by using their slingshots to scare away birds eating the rice fields. Boys use the typical y-shaped slingshot, while girls use a long macraméd type of slingshot.

Both boys and girls go to school starting at about the age of 6. Education is highly valued, but not always completed beyond the fourth or fifth grades for a number of reasons. The schools in the rural areas are virtually unfunded. What little funding they have goes to such costs as teacher salaries and building repair. Consequently, there are virtually no schoolbooks, and parents must purchase pencils, papers, and any other supplies. Teachers have decades'old texts to work with, chalkboards without chalk or erasers, and limited educations of their own. In addition, the agricultural needs of a farming community contribute to frequent absences. Schools close for harvest seasons, in many cases children's labor is needed on the fields for planting season, schools must be closed three days for funerals (during my fieldwork, this meant that the school was closed 18 times in a period of 14 months), and when teachers must hike to the provincial center for their monthly paychecks, schools may have to close. (Another factor contributing to the closing of the school in the village where I worked was the simultaneous birth of both teachers' babies, leaving the school closed for nearly 2 months while the teachers convalesced.)

The period of childhood generally lasts until the early teens, when an adolescents' growing independence and sexuality take hold.

### **Adolescence**

Boys are circumcised from the ages of about 4 to 14. Circumcision is based more on availability of the circumciser than any culturally ascribed time period, although this may have been otherwise in the past, or may differ in other regions. I witnessed one circumcision ceremony, in which all uncircumcised boys over the age of about 4 were publicly circumcised in an unannounced ceremony. Following circumcision, they were given *toaka gasy* to drink and set down on the ground. Every boy thus circumcised developed serious infections, requiring the use of antibiotic creams and, in some cases, oral antibiotics (requiring the father and the infected boy to hike an hour and a half over the hilly terrain to the nearest hospital to get a prescription for antibiotics requiring a substantial portion of the household income).

Adolescence is a period of increasing responsibility and preoccupation with the opposite sex. Girls go to the market every week, in hopes of meeting a boy from another village. Boys also attend markets, and in many cases, begin drinking. Alcohol use and abuse can become a serious problem at this stage. Drinking, and sexual promiscuity, is a concern among a number of parents who regard these habits as new and potentially destructive to both the family and the culture, although it is unclear how new such habits are.

Many girls are mothers by their mid- to late-teens, and if they are unmarried, they remain in their natal household and receive considerable support from their families. Nonetheless, economic hardships are common, and adults recognize early pregnancy as increasing a daughter's economic vulnerability.

### **Adulthood**

Domestic abuse does occur, but a woman is not expected to endure it. Should her husband abuse her, the community will support her and the *fokonolona* (village-level council) may intervene. Nonetheless, divorce may well have significant economic repercussions, leading a woman to endure an unhappy or abusive marriage despite its unacceptability. Divorce means that a woman is expected to return to her natal village. Although she will theoretically have rights to one third of her parents' land, the reality is that land shortages have led most farming families to intensifying production on lands they hold. Thus, a woman may well return home to find that "her" land is being farmed by her brothers, themselves likely to have limited land, and she cannot just reclaim it. Many women protect themselves from just such an event, by continuing to farm their land after marriage, returning frequently to their natal villages and enlisting the help of family members in agricultural production in exchange for giving them a share of the crops. In this way, a woman is able to augment the income of her own household income, and maintain her rights to her land in the event of divorce or the death of her husband.

For a woman to divorce, she must also accept the loss of custodial rights to her children in many cases. Although most groups in Madagascar recognize bilateral kinship, acknowledging one's ancestry through both the mother and the father, because children are important sources of labor, their custodial care remains with the father upon divorce, regardless of cause. A woman may take a nursing infant, but she is expected to return him or her to the custody of the father upon weaning. Visitation rights are generous and accorded both parents. In cases of child abandonment by a father (frequent with fathers, but rare in the case of mothers), a mother will retain custodial rights.

While access to medical care does not prioritize one gender over another, both men and women face limited health care options. Thus, chronic illnesses often become naturalized and suffered without complaint or treatment. Women are more likely to suffer respiratory disorders, which may well be related to cooking over wood fires in homes with little ventilation. Women also suffer serious back problems, related to the planting and weeding of rice that requires them to be bent over for several hours a day. In terms of nutrition, men may well eat more, but their rights to food are not considered a priority over women's. Women will be the first to wake in the morning, however, to prepare the morning meal and fetch water from the river, and the last to end work after washing the dinner dishes in the river.

### **The Aged**

Age is regarded with considerable respect, and is considered a time when one's work in the fields is expected to give way to domestic responsibilities. Older people are important to the household economy by caring for children, cooking, cleaning the home and compound, and providing important medical care, such as finding and preparing indigenous medicines. More recently, elder people have often had to continue working in the fields for wages, if their children have died or left the village, or otherwise failed to care for them.

Elders are also important to the community as members of the *fokonolona* or otherwise contributing to important community decisions. Their views and wishes are regarded with respect and to defy the wishes of an elder is highly stigmatized. More recently, economic stratification has increasingly replaced the stratification that comes with age, as elders complain of having little voice in community matters that more prosperous but younger adults rule on.

Although it is not uncommon to hear of people living to be 115, 120 years (age often being a guess), as people age their health problems increase significantly. Unfortunately, with their increasing health needs, they also face decreasing access to health care. The older they become the more difficult it becomes to cross rugged terrain to reach public health facilities. Thus, elders living in rural areas must rely on traveling health professionals, if there are any (which are rare), indigenous medicine, or the pharmaceutical medicines younger adults bring to them.

While one's eyesight fades, in villages with only candles to light the night, there are no eyeglasses. Hearing aids are available only to those with the money, and who live or have access to larger cities. As arthritis sets in, it becomes more difficult to squat to urinate or defecate, or to cook over an open fire or get up from the floor where one eats and sleeps. As teeth are lost, there are no dentures to replace them. Thus, aging may bring greater respect, but it is also likely to bring greater pain and discomfort in carrying out the days' activities. It is also likely to bring economic hardship, particularly with the death of a spouse (elder women are not expected to leave the community upon the death of a spouse, but are more likely to remain in the household of a son).

### **Dying and Death**

When a person is dying, the extended family is notified and the family prepares for their arrival. They will sit with the *marary* (sick person), caring for them, and visiting with kin. Women provide greater care, but if the dying is a man, male relatives will assist with personal needs. Upon death, the community will gather outside the home, and women will wail loudly, a wailing that continues for several hours.

#### **References 803**

A child's death is regarded as a great tragedy. In many cases, however, the likelihood of a child dying is so great, that it is met with dignity and stoicism, but little outward grief (aside from the wailing that announces the death). The older a child is, or the younger an adult, the more profound the grief.

Upon death, a body will be cleaned by the same-sex kin of the deceased, and then wrapped in clean *lamba* (cloths). If a married woman, her body will be wrapped in grass mats and carried by men to her natal village, where her kin will carry out the remaining preparations for burial. Men will go to the forest and chop down a tree, which will then be stripped of its bark and hollowed out. While this is being done, the *maty* (deceased; the term also means "dead") is wrapped in grass mats and taken to the *trano-be* (literally, "big house" used for ceremonial and communal purposes). Women will attend the corpse throughout its rest in the *trano-be*, fanning flies from its face and guarding its soul. Both men and women, girls and boys, will visit to pay their respects. All nonessential work duties cease for three days.

(Cows are sometimes sacrificed at this point, if affordable, but economic hardships, at least in the village where I conducted my research, have made such sacrifices rare.)

When the coffin is prepared, the *maty* is wrapped in clean cloths again (the body fluids having soiled the corpse), and placed in the coffin. On the third day (or longer if the family has not yet arrived from other villages, although the decay of the corpse is rapid and its internment encouraged), a funeral is held. The village gathers outside the *trano-be*, a *kabary* (public speech) is recited in honor of the dead, and the offerings made from the various households are publicly listed. The coffin is then brought out of the *trano-be*, and placed over burning embers, in which vines have been smoking. The vines are then wrapped around the coffin and tightly tied, the *kabary* continues, and the coffin is then carried into the forests, along with a burning ember (to provide warmth to the *maty* in its afterlife) where it will be interred in caves (based on lineage). As the coffin is taken away, the crowd follows, while the embers are stamped out, placed onto a grass mat, and all the soiled mats and *lamba* added. They are then wrapped up and tightly bound with the vines, and taken away to a sacred spot. Failure to follow this custom may lead to death from ghost sickness (see Harper, 2002 for an account of such a death).

As the coffin leaves the village boundaries, it is carried high overhead where it passes over the crouching

figures of the children (if any) of the deceased. In this way, it blesses their lives before departing.

Grief is expressed with loud displays of sobbing and feinting among the children and women at this point. In some cases, the tears immediately give way to festive partying, in other cases, a deep sadness permeates the village which then prepares to feed the mourners and visiting families.

## **REFERENCES**

- Astuti, R. (1995). *People of the sea: Identity and descent among the Vezo of Madagascar*. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
- Beaujard, P. (1983). *Princes et paysans: Les Tanala de l'Ikongo: Un espace social du sud-est de Madagascar*. Paris: Editions L'Harmattan.
- Bloch, M. (1989). *Ritual, history and power: Selected papers in anthropology*. London and Atlantic Highlands: The Athlone Press.
- Campbell, G. R. (1985). *The role of the London Missionary Society in the rise of the Merina Empire 1810–1861 (A contribution to the economic history of Madagascar)*. Swansea: University College.
- Covell, M. (1987). *Madagascar: Politics, economics and society*. London and New York: Frances Pinter.
- Dubois, S. J. (1938). *Monographie des Betsileo (Madagascar)*. Paris: *Institut d'Ethnologie*.
- Hanson, P. (1997). *The politics of need interpretation in Madagascar's Ranomafana National Park*. Doctoral Dissertation, University of Pennsylvania.
- Harper, J. (2002). *Endangered species: Health, illness and death among Madagascar's people of the forest*. Durham: Carolina Academic Press.
- Hewitt, A. (1992). Madagascar. In *Structural adjustment and the African farmer*. Alex Duncan & John Howell (Eds.). London: Heinemann
- Kightlinger, L. K. (1993). *Mechanisms of Ascaris lumbricoides overdispersion in human communities in the Malagasy rainforest*. Doctoral Dissertation, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, North Carolina.
- Kottak, C. (1971a). Cultural adaptation, kinship, and descent in Madagascar. *Southwestern Journal of Anthropology, 27*(2), 129–147.
- Kottak, C. (1971b). Social groups and kinship calculation among the southern Betsileo. *American Anthropologists, 73*, 178–193.
- Kottak, C. (1980). The past in the present. Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan Press.
- Larson, P. M. (1996). Desperately seeking the "Merina" (Central Madagascar): Reading ethnonyms and their semantic fields in African identity histories, *Journal of Southern African Studies, 22*(4), 541–560.
- Larson, P. M. (2000). *History and memory in the age of enslavement: Becoming Merina in highland Madagascar, 1770–1882*. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann Social History of Africa Series.
- Linton, R. (1933). The Tanala: A hill tribe of Madagascar. Chicago: Field Musuem of History.
- New Africa (2001). *Madagascar Health and Population*, available online at: www.newafrica.com/profiles/healthpopulation