13

# **Bureaucracy and** Development

Rajvir Sharma

**D** ureaucracy occupies a central place in the context of development process of a country like India. However, its role has been visualized and analyzed in different ways by different people. But mostly, the opinion is that the bureaucracy plays a leading role in the formulation and administration of development plans, policies, programmes and projects. At the same time, it is pointed out that bureaucracy is also responsible for the slow progress of social and economic change. Many dysfunctional attributes of bureaucracy are brought to our notice. Nonetheless, it cannot be denied that bureaucracy has a lot of influence and even control over the policies of the state. It is in this context that the role of bureaucracy in the socioeconomic change can be traced in independent India.

At the time of independence, India faced a large number of issues, viz., poverty, hunger, squalor, illiteracy and ignorance, unemployment, illhealth, inequalities of income, regional imbalances, etc. These problems required immediate attention to be solved. Moreover, the problem of scarcity of resources was also acute. Neither had we adequate financial and physical resources, nor was there an adequately trained manpower. In such a situation, the need for optimum utilization of existing resources was imperative. Furthermore, the human and capital-resources were to be augmented. In this context, the policy-makers decided to opt for planning as a strategy of development. The problem before India was not merely of economic developments that refer to increasing production of goods and services or growth. We were to ensure a mechanism of distributive justice encompassing all elements of social justice with special emphasis on alleviation of poverty, equality of opportunity, provision of mass employment, health and education, etc. In other words, the leaders and the administration were to contend with satisfying basic needs of the masses in general

and the underprivileged in particular. Development, thus, was to be seen in a comprehensive perspective which impinges upon social, economic, political, and cultural aspects. It was realized that this gigantic task could not be completed without: (1) the direct and leading intervention of the state in the social and economic affairs; and (2) the development of adequate and appropriate administrative structures and behaviours. Both of these considerations required formulation and implementation of development plans, policies, programmes, and projects together with the creation of a responsive, result and achievement-oriented administration. In other words, the dreams of the poor could be shaped in to reality through the mechanism of bureaucracy insulated from colonial attitudes and behaviour or imbued with democratic, empathetic and goal-oriented attitudes, skills and habits. This could not be done without making conscious efforts for administrative development and development of administration. Let us see now as to how India has proceeded on the path of development administration in terms of capabilities and capacities. The statement subsumes the achievements and failures of bureaucracy also.

## **Approaches and Strategies of Rural Development**

It is evident from what has been mentioned above that development for us was to be a multifaceted exercise-building-up large public sector to play a role of 'commanding heights' in industrial, agricultural, scientific and technological progress, and laying special emphasis on redistribution of national income and wealth in order to realize constitutional goals of equity, justice, and freedom. Priority was naturally given to poverty-alleviation, concentration of wealth into the fewer hands, and employment generation. The focus on rural development, hence, was the consequence. Let us now examine, first, the response to the problems of rural development in light of the following legislative policy and strategic initiatives:

- 1. Land-reforms: legislation and implementation.
- 2. Community development programme.
- 3. Democratic decentralization.
- 4. Approaches to rural poverty-alleviation and employment creation.
- 5. Decentralized planning.
- 6. The shift in the approach in 1990s.

# ❑❑ **Land Reforms: Legislation and Implementation**

At the time of independence, transforming the political economy of rural India was one of the most important jobs of public administration.

The land, the sole important source of income for the rural population, was owned by a handful of *zamindars* and or *jagirdars,* and rest of the rural people worked as either tenants or landless labourers inclusive of bonded labourers. This was the deprived or underprivileged sections of the Indian rural society that constituted the majority. This perpetuated the exploitative relations between the privileged few and underprivileged majority. In order to put an end to all this, minimization of levels of inequality between social classes became a prerequisite. It required priority development of backward and deprived social strata and abolition of mass-poverty. The importance of land reforms in this context need not be over-emphasized. While these reforms aim at augmenting agricultural output leading to rapid economic growth, more employment generation and distributive justice also intended to eliminate discriminative and exploitative social and economic structure. The major elements of land-reforms policy in India are: (1) abolition of intermediaries; (2) tenancy reforms; (3) land ceiling and distribution of surplus land; and (4) consolidation of land holdings. The most revolutionary step in the direction of terminating intermediary tenures was the abolition of the *zamindari* system as a result of which an estimated 20 million farmers were brought into direct relationship with the state and were conferred ownership-rights. The tenancy reforms followed the policy of land to the tiller, security of tenure and regulation of rent. The First Five-Year Plan document suggested the following steps in this context:

- 1. Fixing the rent at 20-25 per cent of the gross produce.
- 2. Termination of tenancy by mutual consent only.
- 3. The land surrendered by the tenant voluntarily should be deemed to be surrender in favour of the state which can distribute that land to the landless people. However, these recommendations did not find favour with the state governments. They sought to provide security of tenure through regulating laws. However, even these laws, for most part, in most states remain unimplemented for political, social, and administrative reasons. Though leasing of land is permitted only in case of widows, minors, unmarried women, physically and mentally challenged, and members of the armed forces, yet the system of absentee landlordism is not completely out of use even in other cases. Thanks to the connivance between the revenue staff and the land owners at the grassroots level.

Another measure was aimed at restricting the size of landholdings through legislation. The first phase covering the period of 1960-72 witnessed many states passing the ceiling laws. However, there was no uniformity in these laws in terms of unit of application and acreage fixed. The implementation of these laws brought to the surface many weaknesses and deficiencies. Hence, the Central Land Reforms Committee was set up to review the agrarian question in 1972 pursuant to whose recommendations a Chief Ministers' conference in the same year prepared national guidelines which included: (1) low ceilings for a family of five members depending upon irrigation and cropping pattern of land; (2) limited exemption from the preview of the ceiling fixed; and (3) implementation of these laws from retrospective effect. The surplus land was to be assigned preferably to landless agricultural workers belonging to the members of Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes, particularly. In order to enable these allottees to do profitable cultivation, the Government of India also initiated a scheme of financial assistance or subsidy to a maximum of `8000 per allottee including the assistance from IRDP, NREP, RLEGP, etc. The productivity of land and income of the people were also sought to be improved through consolidation of landholdings. It may be pointed out here that there has been an 'implementation lag' for various formal structural and informal relational factors. The land-reforms legislation, thus, achieved its objects partially.

# ❑❑ **Community Development Programme (CDP)**

Another major programme with a view to changing the socio-economic conditions of the village community as one unit was launched in India in 1952. The Community Development Programme (CDP) was initiated to achieve the following aims and objectives:

- 1. To develop local leadership and self-governing institutions.
- 2. To develop, in total, the human and capital-resources of rural areas.
- 3. To increase agricultural production in order to raise the living standards of the rural people.
- 4. To ensure a change in the rural mindset, creating in them an ambition for higher standards. The programme was administered at all levels, i.e., national, state, district, block, and the village. The main unit of development was the block. Without going into the details of the programme, we may try to see the impact on poverty-removal. Several scholars, like S.C. Dube, Oscar Lewis, Wilson, and others, and vaious institutions, like the UNESCO, U.N. Evaluation Mission, Programme Evaluation Organization of the Planning Commission and Balwantrai Mehta Committee have gone into the question of achievement and failures of the CDP. In the opinion of the U.N. Mission, the CDP was "one of the major experiments of the 20th century, the results of which is of world-wide interest and represents an effort of an unprecedented magnitude to establish a progressive system of agriculture in a land of impoverishment and hierarchical (caste) society". Toynbee described it as "one of the most beneficent revolutions in the peasantry's life that have been known so far to history". Indeed, it was the first comprehensive programme for socio-economic change with machinery different from the revenue administration set-up. It underlined that: (1) development has to be people-centred based on comprehensive planning and, sustained and long- term investments form the government; and (2) the need for technical and technological inputs, besides the trained personnel for the development of rural areas. Resultant to the CDP was the setting up of credit-societies, primary schools, hospitals and dispensaries, maternity and child-welfare centres, etc. However, the CDP could not achieve the

objective of socio-economic reconstruction of rural India because: (1) it benefited the rich farmers more than the poor; (2) bureaucratic red tape, lack of coordination and inter-departmental rivalries became part of the administrative performance; and (3) the objective of self-reliance and people's participation could not be obtained.

## ❑❑ **Democratic Decentralization**

Democratic decentralization was the consequence of the recognition of the aforesaid weaknesses of the CDP by the planners and the administrators. The Planning Commission, in the Second Five-Year Plan, proposed the need for creating a well-organized democratic set-up or administration at the district level in which village *panchayats* were to be organically linked with popular organizations at the higher levels. Subsequently, the Balwantrai Mehta Committee recommended a three-tier *Panchayati Raj* structure with adequate resources, authority, autonomy, and executive machinery. Norman D. Palmer, A.H. Hanson, Janet Douglas, and Henry Maddie described it as not only an innovation, but also a revolution.<sup>1</sup> It was interpreted as the most exciting experiment in democratic decentralization in any developing country and India's distinctive contribution to the theory and practice of local government. The *Panchayati Raj* institutions were entrusted with three major functions, namely, administrative, political, and developmental. However, the initial enthusiasm towards these institutions began to decline on account of bureaucratic hostility and political apathy, along with non-devolution of sources of revenue, etc. It was a 'God that failed' by the 1970s. Nevertheless, it galvanized the average citizen in the rural areas and succeeded in devising a development strategy for the people. People's participation in development programmes, though it remained a distant dream, continued as a foundation for future development thought and strategy. It is evident from the constitution of the Asoka Mehta Committee in 1977 to review the working of the *Panchayati Raj* system in all its aspects. It renewed interest not only in the decentralization of political power, but also in the people-centered approach towards development to unlock the process of change and growth. This committee opined that the formulation of structural functions and the utilization of financial, administrative, and human resource in PRIs should be determined in the emerging functional necessity of management of rural development. The "new approach" focussed on the functional necessity of administrative decentralization. The committee suggested a two-tier structure: (1) the *Zila Parishad* should serve as the first point of decentralization and the unit of planning, and (2) the *Mandal Panchayat* below the district as the implementing agency. In its view, the PRIs should be the instruments of people's empowerment and their voice. To serve this purpose, the vulnerable sections of rural society were to be given more representation, and all development functions in a district which are now being performed by the state government should be assigned to the *Zila Parishad* which should be provided, among other things, with a professionally-trained team for the preparation of district plans. The committee also suggested that all the staff with decentralized functions should be under the supervision of the *Zila Parishad.* In fact, the committee visualized a separate development administration having decentralized functions along with a composite *Zila Parishad* Secretariat. Another major recommendation among the 132 recommendations it made was the automatic transfer of funds to *Zila Parishad* to implement all transferred development functions. Thereafter, the Committee on Administrative Arrangements for Rural Development set up by the Planning Commission on 31st March 1985, studied the role of *Panchayati Raj*  Institutions and their relationship with the proposed administrative set-up and pointed out the need for entrusting them with planning, plan-implementation, and monitoring of rural development programmes. The plan at the district level, in its view, should be prepared by the district planning board and the *Zila Parishad* should review and authenticate it. The thrust of both the Ashoka Mehta Committee and the CAARD was on priority to rural development, eradication of poverty and all-round improvement in the rural economy through people's empowerment and their participation. The L.M. Singhvi Committee (1988), Sarkaria Commission (1987-88), Thungon Committee (1988), further reiterated the arguments for strengthening the *Panchayati Raj* bodies. Consequently, the 64th and 74th constitution Amendment Bills were introduced in 1989 and 1990, but could not be adopted by the Parliament<sup>2</sup>. Finally, the Central government was able to receive Parliament's approval to the 73rd constitution Amendment Act in December 1992. The 73rd constitution Amendment Act provides for addition of Article 243A and of Part IX, besides the addition of the Eleventh Schedule which incorporates a list of 29 powers and functions of the PRIs. The other central features of this Act are: (1) uniform three-tier structure with regular elections to the PR bodies; (2) provision for a state finance commission; (3) scope for assigning the task of formulation and implementation of plans for development and social justice to the PRIs; and (4) making the PRIs a truly representative body of the people in general, and the vulnerable sections in particular. However, after the close scrutiny of the Bill, one cannot help conclude that the success of the PR system is still left to the discretion of the state governments. Besides, it does not define the relationship between the PRIs and local-level bureaucracy. "Due to the lack of defined roles for the two", opines M. Wadhwani, both used to move in different directions due to the lack of proper coordination. Unfortunately, the present amendment to the constitution has also left this problem untouched and authorized the state legislatures, as in many other areas, to make suitable provisions. While concluding, we may mention that for the success of the PRIs, we would need the strong political will of the state government and also to change the assumption that the problems of socio-economic development of the people can be resolved through the machinery of the state government. This statement can be further examined in the light of the approaches adopted for rural development and removal of pervasive poverty followed in India so far. The question is whether to prepare a structure for participation in making the decisions and implementation, thereof, or to use the traditional bureaucratic machinery for this task and continue with the strategy of conceiving and administering development programmes from above. In pursuing the rural development policy, these and many other approaches have been adopted from time to time. Mainly, these can be analyzed in terms of the policy objectives and programmes. For convenience, they are being put in Chart 13.1.

In all, more than 20 development programmes for rural areas were launched with a number of administrative agencies to implement them. However, the programmes have not been able to make much impact on the social and economic life of the underprivileged population in the countryside because of centralization of development initiative, lack of resources with the states and lethargic attitude of the states to implement them, lack of coordination at the Central, state, and district levels, *ad hocism* in the formulation and implementation of programmes, indifference of beneficiary groups at the grassroot levels, lack of credibility competence and commitment on the part of bureaucracy, lack of sound management information system, etc.<sup>3</sup> The development experience of the last four decades also convinced that centralized planning and action has largely failed to yield the desired result and create an intended impact on the eradication of poverty. Hence, the focus changed in the 1970's and 1980's to decentralized planning. The Planning Commission consistently underlined the need for the same along with the recommendation of various other commissions, committees and the working groups, namely, the ARC, Sarkaria Commission, Dantwala Committee, Dr. C.H. Hanumantha Rao working group, etc. How far we have moved in this direction needs to be analyzed in the some detail. The need, rationale, machinery and progress are some of the issues which require our attention.

## ❑❑ **Decentralized Planning**

The rationale of decentralized planning lies in: (1) failure of centralized planning, (2) diversities, details and information costs, (3) socio-political aims, like people's participation, and (4) coordinated departmental efforts. The desirability of district planning arises from the need for optimization of results from the same plan outlays by integrating the efforts of numerous departments and agencies. The system would produce better coordination and consistency. It would usher in an era of participative development ensuring effective strategy of collective development articulation in collective interest. Ultimately, it might mature into collective self-empowerment. The decentralized planning was taken as an instrument, over a period of time, for changing the rural power structure and social consciousness. Here the assumption is, it would lead to better monitoring and evaluation of programmes and projects. Moreover, planning shall be in tune with the felt needs of the people. S.N. Mishra points out, "decentralization can lead to

| Sl. |                                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
|-----|-------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| No. | Approach                                        | me<br>m<br>Progra                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | Objectives                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| 1.  | munity<br>Approach<br>m<br>Co                   | (B) National Extension Service (2nd October 1953)<br>me (2nd October 1952)<br>ment<br>munity Develop<br>m<br>Progra<br>m<br>(A) Co                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | mation of the villages.<br>med at initiation<br>me was broad-based and ai<br>mic for<br>of the process of socio-econo<br>m<br>The progra                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| 2.  | People's Participa<br>tion                      | mocratic Decentralization (1959)<br>De                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | est of the entire population. The CDP was sought, thus, to be<br>mme with government's participation.<br>ment in the inter<br>m<br>mong the people by enabling the<br>to achieve intensive and continuous develop<br>moting self-reliance a<br>made a people's progra<br>Pro                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| 3.  | ment<br>Area Develop<br>approach                | me (1961).<br>me (1964).<br>m<br>ment Progra<br>me (1972)<br>ment (1974).<br>m<br>(B) Intensive Agriculture Area Progra<br>(A) Intensive Agricultural Develop<br>m<br>(C) Drought-prone Area Progra<br>mand Area Develop<br>m<br>Co<br>(D)                                                                                                                                          | ment of the area as a whole.<br>mic use of irrigation<br>m technology.<br>me in agriculture<br>Initiating steps to: (1) Increase agricultural production;<br>(2) assuring reasonably high prices for agricultural pro<br>moisture conservation, irrigation and<br>mode<br>m<br>Making scientific, efficient and econo<br>potential and construction of roads.<br>ment progra<br>mproved and<br>Intensive agricultural develop<br>Integrated area develop<br>duce; and (3) use of i<br>through soil and<br>aforestation. |
| 4.  | Target Group<br>Approach                        | ment Agency (1972).<br>ment Agency (1971) and Marginal<br>ment Project (1972)<br>mers' and Agricultural Labourers' Develop<br>(2) Integrated Tribal Develop<br>mers' Develop<br>mall Far<br>(1) S<br>Far                                                                                                                                                                            | Growth with social justice.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| 5.  | mployment<br>generation<br>E                    | men and Children in Rural Areas (1982)<br>me (1983)<br>mployment (1979)<br>m<br>me (1980)<br>mployment Guarantee Progra<br>mployment (1971)<br>m<br>me (1977)<br>mployment Progra<br>(e) Training of Rural Youth for Self-e<br>me for Rural e<br>m<br>Work Progra<br>Wo<br>ment of<br>(d) Rural Landless E<br>(c) National Rural E<br>(a) Crash Sche<br>(b) Food for<br>(f) Develop | m<br>mployment opportunities for the rural une<br>mployed.<br>ployed and under- e<br>Creation of e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| 6.  | m Needs<br>Approach<br>mu<br>Mini               | me (1973)<br>m<br>m Needs Progra<br>mu<br>Mini                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | mentary education, health, nutrition, water<br>m<br>ment and social infrastructure with e<br>supply, housing, roads, etc.<br>Social develop<br>phasis on ele                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| 7.  | Integrated Rural<br>ment<br>Approach<br>Develop | me (1978) inclusive of all ongo<br>mes<br>m<br>ment Progra<br>m<br>ment progra<br>Integrated Develop<br>ing rural develop                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | ment for poverty alleviation.<br>major instru<br>To serve as a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |

Chart 13.1 Policy Objectives and Programs

#### **252** ✽ CHAPTER 13

greater social justice. It is visualized that such control over determination of priorities and use of resources exercised by the people would mean greater social justice as a much greater number of people would be involved in the decision-making process."<sup>4</sup> Echoing the same sentiments, Paulo Freire avers by saying, "the basic elementary criterion is whether or not the society is a being for itself. If it is not, the other criteria indicate modernization rather than development."<sup>5</sup> In the words of Dr. C.H. Hanumantha Rao, "Decentralization of planning and decision-making has become urgent with the changes in the orientation and structure of development planning over the last two decades as would be evident from the large number of beneficiaryoriented schemes and area-development schemes."<sup>6</sup> As for objectives of local level planning, the working group on district planning mentioned three, *viz*., "increasing production, reducing unemployment and alleviation of poverty."<sup>7</sup> In recognition of this context and framework, many states established district level planning machinery, mainly of the following types.<sup>8</sup>

- 1. District Planning Boards/Committee/Council;
- 2. District Development Board/Committee/Council;
- 3. District Planning and Development Council; and
- 4. District Planning and Monitoring Committee.

These bodies are concerned with the following functions:

- 1. Determining the major objectives of the district plan;
- 2. Formulation of major strategy and thrust of district plan;
- 3. Compilation of data-demographic, agro-climatic, socio-economic, and infra structural, etc.;
- 4. Modification of the ongoing programmes and projects;
- 5. Proposals for removal of inter-block disparities;
- 6. Assessment of unemployment/underemployment and proposals for manpower planning and budgeting;
- 7. Proposal for interlink ages between various projects and programmes;
- 8. Proposals for organization and management to ensure that no implementation gap exists;
- 9. Assessment of resources available from the state, center, local bodies, financial institutions, voluntary organizations & NGOs;
- 10. Analysis and proposals regarding relationships and links between the district plan and regional and state development plans.

With some variations, the planning bodies in various states prepare annual, five–years, and perspective *plans alongside* the *functions of coordination, monitoring* review, evaluation, implementation, etc. It may, however, be mentioned that district planning has proved to be relatively a failure because the administration has not made any serious efforts to deal with the problems related to district planning, though many commissions and committees have focused on them from time to time. Some of the obstacles may again be reiterated. First, there is a gap between responsibility and authority, insofar as the district-level government has no autonomy to take decisions on plans, projects or programmes. Secondly, there is inadequacy of financial powers at the district level. Thirdly, the PRIs have been rendered redundant and irrelevant to articulation of peoples' needs giving precedence to bureaucracy in the formulation, and implementation of departmental schemes. Besides, adequately trained and competent planning personnel are also not there. This was clearly brought out by the Dantwala Committee when it observed, "in majority of states, no attempt seems to have been made to improve personnel resources at this level. Even in the case of states, which have set up something like district planning machinery, the composition of staff reflects that there has been no serious attempt to induct technical skills in planning. The staffs who have been appointed in these units perform only routine secretarial functions, assisting the District Development Council under the collector, but do not provide much technical support in the tasks of plan-formulation, monitoring, review, and evaluation. Thus, in many states, the district planning cell consists of district planning officer assisted by statistical and research assistants and clinical staff mainly look after the implementation of the district plan in a routine manner."<sup>9</sup>

Other questions gaining attention are: What after varying experiments with socio-economic development approaches and methodologies appear to be mostly inadequate to remove poverty and unemployment? And, what is the future role of the planning and administration, especially in the context of ongoing economic reforms in India? It is proposed to examine these issues in the light of changes of paradigms of development initiated by the government in the 1990s.

# ❑❑ **Shift in Development Strategies Since the 1990s**

The experience of the past four decades of socio-economic development suggests two things. One, that India was able to achieve the targets of economic and technological development to a large extent, but it failed to make progress on social justice and development. Two, India faced severe balance of payments (BoP) constraints in the late 1970s, and 1980s. This proved that state and its machinery, which expanded phenomenally on account of command economy or semi-command economy established through centralized planning and leading deterministic role on the part of the state, is not an appropriate answer to the solution of the problems of the poor. In other words, it is being increasingly recognized that the days of 'big government' are over and that the state should play the role of a facilitator of development rather than playing that of an interventionist one. It should keep itself away, as far as possible, from being a producer or provider of goods and services, since the job of the state is to govern, and not to do business. However, it is not only a part statement of the truth as total acceptance of this view would be tantamount to abdicating social responsibility on the part of the state. It would mean that the ideas of equity, social justice, and social welfare would recede to oblivion. It cannot be an acceptable proposition. While the open economy approach could be inescapable in the face of the public sector remaining an enclave and in perpetual state of infancy leading to inefficient and ineffective performance, it would be anybody's guess that the poor shall be left to fend for themselves. The dysfunctional characteristics of the structure and behaviour of bureaucracy, *viz.,* inefficiency, non-competitiveness, lack of creativity and imagination, ineffectiveness, lack of trust in the capabilities and capacities of the masses, status and authority-orientation, corruption, unresponsiveness and lack of professional ethics and professionalism, etc., are enough reasons to make the development concept free from the bureaucratic chains and promote peoples' initiative including the enhanced role to private industry and business. The idea behind the privatization of economic development is the re-emergence of the validity of Keynsian economics and trickle-down theory. It is being assumed that the problems of poverty and unemployment would be addressed by the expanding industry, trade and business. The process would involve opening up of Indian economy and abolition of the system of licence, permit and quota raj. The new role of the state, as envisaged in the economic reforms, would have to concentrate on removing hurdles from the way of the investors and regulating the new development process to protect the interests of the deprived and the exploited. This is being conceived through the initiation of economic reforms since 1991 and adjusting policies to the new demands of marketization. The social developmental role of the state is also being reminded simultaneously. The economic reforms under the new paradigms consist of two parts:<sup>10</sup> (1) Short-term stabilization policies for correcting imbalances in the balance of payments through devaluation, improving macro-economic balances through curtailment of government expenditure, monetary liquidity, and market-liberalization (eliminating subsidies/ price-controls); and (2) Long-term economic reforms, *e.g.,* deregulation of industry, liberalization of trade, elimination of protective tariff-barriers, privatization of financial institutions and public enterprises, streamlining of state sector, privatization of social programmes, and rationalizing the tax system.

The question is how far we have responded to these economic reforms. It can be mentioned in this context that a number of reforms have been undertaken, some of which can be mentioned as follows:<sup>11</sup>

- 1. Downward adjustment of value of rupee;
- 2. Liberalization of foreign trade regime;
- 3. Cutting down tariffs;
- 4. Liberalization of policies in respect of trans-border capital-flows;
- 5. Abolition of industrial licensing in a large number of cases;
- 6. Opening-up of the earlier forbidden areas to private enterprises;
- 7. Multiple steps towards financial sector and fiscal reforms.

#### **Imperatives for Planning and Bureaucracy**

This process of liberalization and privatization has to be simultaneously supported by reallocating roles to planning and administration. The process of dismantling of controls, regulations and administered prices, and adoption of EXIM, and EXIT policies notwithstanding, planning shall play a crucial role in redefining the role of the state. This is evident from the stipulations of the Eight Five-Year Plan when it says, "in view of the need to build massive infrastructure, existence of significant number of poor and underprivileged, existence of severe imbalances in the course of development, government will have to play a role and that role will have to be planned out. The government will have to step in for creation of supply of essential inputs, like power and creation of infrastructure where private initiative is not adequate. It will have to continue to run programmes for the poor and the weaker sections. Programmes for social welfare, population-control, environment protection, health, and education, at least at the primary level, will continue to be the responsibility of the government for quite some time."<sup>12</sup> Further, the role of planning will subsume the following functions:

- 1. Reorienting governance for speedy service delivery;
- 2. Controlling and regulating the monopoly tendencies;
- 3. Suggesting interventions for expanding the market and making it work more freely, competitively and with accessibility to big and small;
- 4. Efficient redeployment of resources released from disinvestments in public enterprises;
- 5. Planning for protection of consumer interests, removal of hurdles in free movement of goods, supportive legal framework, etc.;
- 6. Social investment and organizing the poor for self-development with assistance of the government and the voluntary and non-governmental organizations;
- 7. Search for ways and means of making the least, but the most effective interventions for the poverty-alleviation and social justice;
- 8. Preparing a perspective plan to formulate views on a longer period of development;
- 9. Review and evaluation of technological development and its impact on the unemployment;
- 10. Reorientation of development policies programmes and projects to inculcate developmental-orientation, rather than dependencyorientation, among the people by creating peoples' institutions with peoples' empowerment.

With changing role of planning and decline in "big government", bureaucracy cannot remain unaffected. Some of the implications can be visualized as follows;

1. Decline in the size, authority, power and status of bureaucracy which may result in inbuilt opposition of bureaucracy, albeit in a concealed manner, to the success of the new economic policy;

- 2. Emphasis on administrative reforms;
- 3. Creation of responsive, empathetic, competitive bureaucratic mechanisms.

In sum, it can be mentioned that the first four decades of independence and development till 1990 assigned a central role to bureaucracy in development and nation-building, but the 1990s are visualizing a supportive rather than directional and commanding role to public administration. It is also true that Indian development process has been rich in the intent and content, but poor in performance.

### **Notes and References**

- 1. For details, see Henry Maddie, *Panchayati Raj: A Study of Rural Local Government in India,* Longman. 1970; Norman D. Palmer. *The Indian Political System,* Hougton Mifflin; Hanson and Janet Douglas, *India's Democracy,* Delhi, Vikas, 1972.
- 2. For details, see *CAARD Report,* Department of Rural Development, Ministry of Agriculture, Government of India, December 1985; *L.M. Singhvi Committee Report on Panchayati Raj and District Planning,* Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, Government of India, July, 1988; *Sarkaria Commission Report on Centre-State Relations,* Government of India, Vol. II, July 1988; *Thungon Comunitte Report,*  Gol, 1988.
- 3. See Kamal Nayan Kabra, "Leadership and Development: Some Reflections in the Indian Context," *Indian Journal of Public Administration,* Vol. XL, No. 3, July-Sept., 1994, pp. 279–86.
- 4. S. N. Mishra, *Participative Management and Rural Development,* Mittal Publications, 1992.
- 5. Paulo Freire, *Pedagogy of the Oppressed,* Seabury Press, New York, p. 161.
- 6. See the Foreword written by C.H. Hanumantha Rao to the *Report of the Working Group 011 District Planning,* Vol. I, May 1984.
- 7. *Ibid.,* p. 25.
- 8. *Ibid.,* pp. 52–53.
- 9. See *Dantwala Committee* (Committee on Block-level Planning) Report, Planning Division, 1978.
- 10. Perspective Planning Division, "The Indian Planning Process and an Agenda for its Reorientation", Occasional papers, 1994, p. 11.
- 11. See *Ibid.,* p. 12.
- 12. See *Ibid.,* pp. 12–13.