#### 139. Day, T. & Taylor, P. D. (1998). Chromosomal drive and the evolution of meiotic nondisjunction and trisomy in humans. *Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A*, 95(5): 2361–5; Hall, J. G. (1992). 45. Turner syndrome. In: *The genetic basis of common diseases* (King, R. A., Rotter, J. I., & Morulsky, A. G., eds.), pp. 895–914. New York & Oxford: Oxford University Press.

- 140. to 142. Ball, H. L. & Hill, C. M. (1999). Insurance ovulation, embryo mortality and twinning. *J Biosoc Sci*, 31(2): 245–55; Eriksson, A. W. & Fellman, J. (2000). Seasonal variation of livebirths, stillbirths, extramarital births and twin maternities in Switzerland. *Twin Res*, 3(4): 189–201; Greenberg, D. A., Hodge, S. E. et al. (2001). Excess of twins among affected sibling pairs with autism: Implications for the etiology of autism. *Am J Hum Genet*, 69(5): 1062–7; Heyer, E. (1999). One founder/one gene hypothesis in a new expanding population: Saguenay (Quebec, Canada). *Hum Biol*, 71(1): 99–109; Kjeldsen, M. J., Kyvik, K. O. et al. (2001). Genetic and environmental factors in epilepsy: A population-based study of 11900 Danish twin pairs. *Epilepsy Res*, 44(2–3): 167–78; Kogan, M. D., Alexander, G. R. et al. (2000). Trends in twin birth outcomes and prenatal care utilization in the United States, 1981–1997. *Jama*, 284(3): 335–41; Lloveras, E., Lecumberri, J. M. et al. (2001). A female infant with a 46,XX/48,XY, 8, 10 karyotype in prenatal diagnosis: a "vanishing twin" phenomenon? *Prenat Diagn*, 21(10): 896–7; Tanner, C. M., Goldman, S. M. et al. (2001). Essential tremor in twins: An assessment of genetic vs environmental determinants of etiology. *Neurology*, 57(8): 1389–91.
- 143. Bergman, A. J., van den Berg, I. E. et al. (1998). Spectrum of mutations in the fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase gene of tyrosinemia type 1 patients in northwestern Europe and Mediterranean countries. *Hum Mutat*, 12(1): 19–26.

- 144. Wang, C., Kim, E. et al. (1998). A PAX3 polymorphism (T315K) in a family exhibiting Waardenburg Syndrome type 2. *Mol Cell Probes*, 12(1): 55–7.
- 145. Castro, E., Ogburn, C. E. et al. (1999). Polymorphisms at the Werner locus: I. Newly identified polymorphisms, ethnic variability of 1367Cys/Arg, and its stability in a population of Finnish centenarians. *Am J Med Genet*, 82(5): 399–403.
- 146. Butler, P., McIntyre, N. et al. (2001). Molecular diagnosis of Wilson disease. *Mol Genet Metab*, 72(3): 223–30.
- 147. Hamel, B. C., Raams, A. et al. (1996). Xeroderma pigmentosum—Cockayne syndrome complex: A further case. *J Med Genet*, 33(7): 607–10; Spatz, A., Giglia-Mari, G. et al. (2001). Association between DNA repair-deficiency and high level of p53 mutations in melanoma of Xeroderma pigmentosum. *Cancer Res*, 61(6): 2480–6.
- 148. Fausto-Sterling, A. (2000). *Sexing the body: Gender politics and the construction of sexuality*. New York: Basic Books; Weil, D., Wang, I. et al. (1994). Highly homologous loci on the X and Y chromosomes are hot-spots for ectopic recombinations leading to XX maleness. *Nat Genet*, 7(3): 414–9.
- 149. Fausto-Sterling, A. (2000). *Sexing the body: Gender politics and the construction of sexuality*. New York: Basic Books; Kucheria, K., Mohapatra, I. et al. (1996). Clinical and DNA studies on 46, XY females with gonadal dysgenesis. A report of six cases. *J Reprod Med*, 41(4): 263–6.
- 150. Gould, S. J. & Valle, D. (2000). Peroxisome biogenesis disorders: genetics and cell biology. *Trends Genet*, 16(8): 340–5; Suzuki, Y., Shimozawa, N. et al. (2001). Clinical, biochemical and genetic aspects and neuronal migration in peroxisome biogenesis disorders. *J Inherit Metab Dis*, 24(2): 151–65.

# **HIV/AIDS Research and Prevention**

### **Anthropological Contributions and Future Directions**

#### **James W. Carey, Erin Picone-DeCaro, Mary Spink Neumann, Deborah Schwartz, Delia Easton, and Daphne Cobb St. John**

## **INTRODUCTION**

As of December 2002, 42 million adults and children were estimated to be living with HIV/AIDS in the world (UNAIDS/WHO, 2002). Approximately 29.4 million of these are in Sub-Saharan Africa. More than 30% of the adults in some southern African countries are living with HIV infection. Over 3 million AIDS-related deaths have occurred globally during 2002 (UNAIDS/WHO, 2002). The pandemic grows at an accelerated speed, with an estimated 13,000–15,000 new infections occurring each day (Osmanov et al., 2002; UNAIDS/WHO, 2002).

#### **462 HIV/AIDS Research and Prevention**

#### **Introduction 463**

Beyond Africa, expanding epidemics are present in Russia, Eastern Europe, and many parts of Asia. A combined total of more than 5 million people are infected in India and China (UNAIDS/WHO, 2002). In comparison, there were over 816,000 reported AIDS cases, and more than 174,000 reported HIV infection cases among persons who had not developed AIDS in the United States and its territories as of December 2001 (CDC, 2001c). These figures are likely to be underestimates because of undiagnosed and unreported cases. HIV often impacts the most impoverished and vulnerable groups. AIDS-related deaths of parents have left an estimated 14 million children (less than 15 years old) living as orphans in countries across the world (UNAIDS, 2001). While there have been many advances in medical treatment, there still is no cure or effective vaccine. Many persons do not know they are infected until they progress to later stages of disease, and they often learn of their HIV serostatus only after they acquire opportunistic infections. Regardless of their awareness of their serostatus, very large numbers of HIV-infected persons do not have sufficient access to appropriate and affordable medical care.

Morbidity and mortality due to HIV/AIDS has devastated the economic and social well-being of numerous countries. HIV/AIDS differs from many other diseases in that it often strikes adults in the most productive age groups. Even with access to good medical care, the disease is eventually fatal. Economic costs include individual and societal expenditures for medical care, drugs, and funeral expenses. Other costs include loss of productive and well-educated members of society, increased health insurance rates, burdens on hospitals and public social service programs, and care of orphans. The cumulative impact of the disease has had significant deleterious effects on national economies (Bollinger & Stover, 1999; Rugalema, 2000; Rugalema, Weigang, & Mbwika, 1999). In 1997, public health spending on AIDS alone exceeded 2% of gross domestic product (GDP) in 7 out of 16 African countries where total health expenditure from public and private sources on all diseases accounted for 3–5% of gross national product (GNP) (UNAIDS, 2000). Loss of economically productive and vocationally trained persons due to illness or death, and diversion of labor to the care of sick family members, exacerbates food insecurity by reducing the agricultural output and distribution capacity in many less-developed nations. It can impact other non-agricultural economic sectors as well (Barnett & Whiteside, 2002; World Bank, 1999).

Complex societal, behavioral, and medical factors affect HIV transmission, treatment, and control. Researchers from an array of social and behavioral sciences have worked with public health investigators and practitioners to better understand the conditions that influence HIV transmission. Social and behavioral scientists have played a significant role in developing effective interventions to reduce HIV-related risk behaviors. Psychology, in particular, has made notable contributions to the struggle against HIV/AIDS, especially in the form of behavioral change theories and intervention design. In recent years, other social and behavioral science disciplines, including anthropology, economics, health education, communications, sociology, and many others, also have played increasing roles.

The purpose of this entry is to review some of the major contributions made by anthropology within the larger field of HIV/AIDS prevention research and to identify potential areas for future growth. The HIV research literature is extremely large and complex. Space limitations mean that the entry cannot provide an all-inclusive review. Moreover, because many HIV research studies are implemented by large multidisciplinary teams, it often is very difficult to discern the contributions specifically growing from anthropology, even when prominent individual anthropologists explicitly collaborate on a study.

With these caveats in mind, we discuss a sample of the published literature as a way to highlight major issues and trends and also to show how anthropology fits into the larger HIV/AIDS research context. We begin by providing a summary of key epidemiological and medical aspects of the disease. Second, we discuss an overview of the contributions of the social and behavioral sciences, giving particular attention to the development of theorybased HIV prevention interventions. Third, we examine in greater detail areas where anthropology has made its largest impact to date, especially in the conduct of formative HIV behavioral research, and in the application and development of ethnographic methods for the study of HIV risk behaviors. Finally, we suggest areas where anthropologists should play a greater role in the future, such as more active involvement in the development and rigorous testing of new intervention approaches based on anthropological theories and empirical field studies.

# **EPIDEMIOLOGICAL AND MEDICAL FEATURES OF HIV/AIDS**

### **History of the Disease**

To date, the earliest known instance of infection with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is from a blood sample collected in 1959 from a man in the Democratic Republic of Congo, although how he became infected is not known (Zhu et al., 1998). Most researchers believe that the viruses that cause AIDS in humans (HIV-1 and HIV-2) evolved from related viruses found among chimpanzees and sooty mangabey monkeys in Africa (Korber et al., 2000). Korber et al. (2000) estimate that the ancestor of the contemporary HIV-1 virus crossed over into humans, possibly via a hunter's exposure to blood from a chimpanzee infected with a simian immunodeficiency virus, some time between 1915 and 1941. Beginning in the late 1970s and early 1980s, rare types of pneumonia, cancer, and other illnesses that normally do not affect individuals with healthy immune systems began to be reported by medical personnel in Los Angeles and New York among a number of gay male and other patients in the United States (CDC, 1981). In 1982 public health officials began to use the term "Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome," or AIDS, to describe the occurrences of these opportunistic infections and illnesses, and the virus itself was identified in the early 1980s. Since that time, HIV/AIDS has become a major worldwide public health problem. It has reached pandemic proportions in places such as southern African nations and Southeast Asia (United Nations, 2001). In spite of enormous international research efforts and expenditure of funds, there currently is no effective vaccine to prevent primary HIV infection (Johnston & Flores, 2001).

#### **HIV Transmission**

HIV infection is acquired most commonly through sexual contact with an infected partner and by sharing contaminated injection equipment, often from illicit drug injection (CDC, 2000a). Prior to the implementation of HIV-specific screening procedures in 1985, HIV also was spread through blood transfusions using infected blood or blood-clotting factors. Transmission via accidental needle sticks in a health care setting is rare and post exposure prophylaxis (PEP) is often available in such situations (CDC, 1995). HIV transmission through contaminated blood products or in medical settings may still occur in poorer countries that do not enforce HIV screening precautions or that re-use needles. Vertical transmission, or the passing of HIV from mother to infant during pregnancy and child birth, can also occur. However, antiretroviral therapy (ART) administered to the mother and to the infant in the neonatal period, results in a major reduction of the overall risk of vertical transmission of HIV to approximately 8%. In some settings, ART combined with cesarean section, has resulted in a further lessening of risk to levels of less than 2% (Andiman, 2002). Nursing HIV-infected mothers can also pass HIV to their child through breast milk (Georgeson & Filteau, 2002; Quintanilla, 1996). While researchers have identified evidence of HIV in the saliva of infected individuals (Levy, 1993; Levy & Greenspan, 1988), there is little evidence to conclude that HIV is spread through contact with saliva. There also is no evidence to show that HIV can be spread through casual contact with the tears, sweat, urine, or feces of an infected individual (CDC, 2000a). The exact probability for transmission via oral sex is not known, although it is likely to be very low (CDC, 2000b).

### **Immune System Effects**

HIV weakens the body's ability to fight disease by damaging the CD4 cells, a component of the immune system that helps respond to infections (McCune, 2001). Thus, infected individuals with weakened immune systems become susceptible to numerous HIV-related opportunistic infections and other conditions (CDC, 1997, 1999, 2002a, 2002b; Gallant, Moore, & Chaisson, 1994; Levy, 1993; Sulkowski, Mast, Seeff, & Thomas, 2000). Some of the more common of these illnesses include:

- bacterial and mycobacterial infections such as syphilis and tuberculosis
- protozoal and fungal infections such as candidiasis, or Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia (PCP)
- malignancies such as Kaposi's sarcoma and lymphoma
- viral infections such as cytomegalovirus (CMV), hepatitis, and herpes simplex
- neurological conditions such as AIDS dementia complex (ADC).

If left untreated, co-infection with HIV and opportunistic infections can lead to rapid deterioration of the individual's health, and ultimately, death. For example, tuberculosis has become the leading cause of mortality among HIV-infected persons worldwide (CDC, 2000b; Cegielski et al., 2002; Rieder, Cauthen, Kelly, Bloch, & Snider, 1989; UNAIDS, 2000). Persons co-infected with

#### HIV-1 and malaria may be more likely to develop clinical malaria, particularly as the onset of AIDS approaches (Whitworth et al., 2000).

## **HIV Prevention and Condom Use**

The only certain way to avoid risk of sexual exposure to HIV is to abstain or to have sex in a mutually monogamous relationship with an uninfected partner (Novello et al., 1993). However, the risk of HIV infection from engaging in vaginal or anal sex with an infected partner or one of unknown serostatus can be greatly reduced through consistent and correct use of latex or polyurethane condoms (CDC, 2001a; NIAID, 2001). In a European study of 124 HIV serodiscordant heterosexual couples, de Vincenzi (1994) reported that none of the seronegative partners that remained sexually active during the study period and who reported always using a condom became infected. In contrast, among 121 couples who inconsistently used condoms, seronegative partners became infected at a rate of 4.8 per 100 person-years (95% confidence interval 2.5–8.4). Approximately 15,000 sexual intercourse episodes were reported by the couples in di Vincenzi's study. In another study of seronegative female partners of HIV-infected men, Saracco et al. (1993) reported an incidence rate of 1.1 per 100 person-years among those who always used condoms versus a rate of 7.2 per 100 person-years among those who did not always use or never used a condom. Among Haitian sexually active serodiscordant couples, Deschamps, Pape, Hafner, and Johnson (1996) found an HIV incidence rate of 1.0 per 100 person-years among the seronegative members of couples that were consistent condom users versus a rate of 6.8 per 100 person-years for infrequent or non-condom using couples. Overall, when comparing various studies in a meta-analysis, Davis and Weller (1999) estimated that consistent condom use is approximately 87% effective at preventing HIV infection (95% confidence interval60–96%). This estimate is roughly similar to a condom's effectiveness at preventing unwanted pregnancies. However, condoms' effectiveness for preventing infection with other STDs may vary (Manhart & Koutsky, 2002; NIAID, 2001).

### **HIV Treatment**

At present, there are three major classes of anti-HIV drugs (NIAID, 2002a). These include protease inhibitors, nucleoside analog reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs), and non-nucleoside analog reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTs). Protease inhibitors work by preventing HIV from being successfully assembled by and released from infected CD4 cells. NRTIs act by incorporating themselves into the genetic material of the virus, thereby halting the viral building process (Richman, 2001). NNRTs stop HIV production by binding directly onto reverse transcriptase and preventing the duplication of viral genetic materials (NIAID, 2002a, 2002b; Williams et al., 1993).

Treatment generally involves administration of complex combinations of these drugs. Many of these powerful agents have an array of unpleasant side-effects and toxicities. Combination treatment using therapies from each class is necessary to reduce the chance of the virus developing drug resistance (Richman, 2001). Unfortunately, over 90% of HIV-infected persons live in impoverished less-developed countries where most cannot afford the high price of antiretroviral drugs or do not have access to them (Rand Corporation, 2002; United Nations, 2001; Yamey, 2000). This is the case despite reduction in the treatment costs brought on by price competition and international political pressures on the pharmaceutical industry (Garrett, 2000; United Nations, 2001).

# **SOCIAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCE IN HIV PREVENTION RESEARCH**

## **Importance of Behavioral Theory for HIV Prevention**

HIV prevention programs must, by necessity, rely heavily upon strategies to change people's behaviors that put them at risk for infection. Public health personnel should concentrate effort on changing those behaviors that carry the greatest risk for HIV transmission. The design of effective HIV behavioral interventions is highly challenging, in part because of the complex array of individual and contextual variables that affect sexual or drug use behaviors, and also because of the difficulty in getting persons to change behaviors that provide them with powerful and pleasurable rewards.

One of the most important contributions of the behavioral and social sciences to HIV/AIDS prevention has been the development of theory-based behavioral intervention strategies. Behavioral and social science theories are useful because they help guide researchers and intervention personnel to focus their attention on the

factors that promote or discourage HIV risk behaviors (CDC, 2001b). Useful theories identify specific correlates of HIV risk behavior that, if changed, should help bring about reductions in behaviors that put an individual at risk for HIV infection. There is value in designing a mixture of interventions specifically for groups with known elevated risk for HIV infection, along with more general population interventions for groups at lower risk (Sumartojo, Carey, Doll, & Gayle, 1997).

Many of the most prominent theories used to date in HIV prevention research have grown out of the social psychology, health education, and health communication fields. If they are adequately specified, theory-based HIV behavioral interventions can be tested and compared using experimental or quasi-experimental research designs. Theories that stand up to empirical field studies not only have value for explaining patterns and causes of HIV risk behavior, they also have practical utility for guiding prevention interventions. HIV behavioral interventions that have been shown to be effective in scientifically rigorous research provide an essential base for turning HIV prevention research into useful public health practice (CDC, 2001b).

## **Examples of Theories Used in HIV Behavioral Interventions**

After HIV/AIDS was recognized, early work to curb the spread of the disease attempted to promote accurate factual knowledge about HIV transmission risk behaviors and risk reduction (e.g., DiClemente, Boyer, & Morales, 1988; Kelly, St. Lawrence, Brasfield, & Hood, 1989; Kelly et al., 1990; Marin, 1989; Norris & Ford, 1991). These education efforts were successful in encouraging greater levels of understanding that HIV can be acquired through sexual contact or by sharing contaminated injection drug equipment. They also were successful in building awareness that personal risk of becoming infected can be lowered by using condoms during sex, being sexually abstinent, limiting sex to a monogamous relationship with an uninfected partner, and by avoiding injection drug use with contaminated equipment or stop shooting drugs.

In spite of these successes, some groups continue to hold medically inaccurate beliefs and unsubstantiated opinions concerning persons with HIV infection. For example, in a nationally representative survey of adults conducted in the United States during 2000, researchers found that over 40% of the respondents incorrectly believed that it is likely for HIV to be transmitted through sharing a glass, or by being coughed or sneezed on by a person with HIV infection (CDC, 2000d). Nearly 19% of these survey respondents indicated that persons who acquired HIV through sex or drug use "got what they deserved." Stigmatizing responses were more frequent among men, European Americans, persons over the age of 55 years, those with only a high school education, those with an annual income less than \$30,000, and those with a poorer self-reported health status. After more than 20 years of efforts to build public awareness, the results of this survey underscore the importance of continuing to dispel HIV/AIDS misconceptions, along with inaccurate and stigmatizing beliefs in many groups, even in economically and educationally well-off countries such as the United States.

While an accurate understanding of basic HIVrelated facts is important and necessary, by itself factual knowledge generally is not sufficient to motivate reduction in HIV risk behaviors. More sophisticated theories of HIV risk behavioral reduction are needed that take into account other factors beyond factual knowledge. During the early 1990s, a variety of theoretical models were adapted for understanding HIV risk behavior and to design prevention interventions. One influential example is the Health Belief Model (HBM), which initially was developed in the early 1950s to understand why people were reluctant to participate in tuberculosis screening and other public health services (Rosenstock, 1974; Rosenstock, Strecher, & Becker, 1988, 1994). As applied to HIV, the HBM proposes that six types of variables influence health behaviors of individuals:

- 1. *Perceived threat* is a person's subjective perception of how susceptible they are to acquiring HIV and how serious the medical and social consequences would be.
- 2. *Perceived benefits* are a person's beliefs regarding whether HIV risk reduction strategies (e.g., asking sex partners to use a condom) will reduce perceived threats.
- 3. *Perceived barriers* are the negative consequences persons think may result if they try an HIV risk reduction strategy. For example, economically dependent women may not suggest condom use to an abusive male partner for fear of a beating or eviction.
- 4. *Cues to action* include awareness of bodily symptoms or environmental features that help stimulate action. For example, if a person contracts an STD or hears a salient media campaign, he or she may be more likely to engage in HIV risk reduction behaviors.
- 5. *Perceived self-efficacy* was added to the HBM by Bandura in the 1970s (see Bandura, 1986, 1997, for reviews). Self-efficacy is the degree to which a person believes that he or she is capable of executing a specific health-related action.

#### **466 HIV/AIDS Research and Prevention**

#### **Social and Behavioral Science in HIV Prevention Research 467**

6. Finally, the HBM also recognizes that a wide array of other variables, such as demographic, social, psychological, structural, and environmental factors, may shape a person's health beliefs and, thus, may influence his or her health behaviors.

HIV risk reduction interventions that are based on HBM would attempt, among intervention participants, to increase their perceived levels of HIV threat, convince them of the efficacy and value of proposed HIV risk reduction strategies, assist them to find realistic ways to overcome barriers they anticipate, increase their level of awareness, and conduct exercises to build the skills they need to implement a strategy.

Another influential theory that has guided a large segment of HIV behavioral research and intervention design is the Theory of Reasoned Action (TRA; see Ajzen & Fishbein, 1980, for an overview and history since the late 1960s). In addition to HIV and STD studies, investigators have used the TRA to study a wide array of other behaviors including smoking, dieting, wearing seatbelts, exercising, and breast feeding (Fishbein, Middlestadt, & Hitchcock, 1994). As described by Fishbein et al. (1994) when applied to HIV behavioral research, the TRA includes the following key components:

- 1. *Define the behaviors of interest as specifically as possible* to minimize conceptual ambiguity and include four components: action, target, context, and time. For example, a study might investigate if female commercial sex workers (target) in brothels (context) consistently (time) request that all sex partners use a male latex condom (action).
- 2. The strength of a person's *prior intention to perform the behavior* is one of the strongest predictors of the performance of the behavior.
- 3. Strength of intention is thought to be influenced by two major sets of factors: (a) the person's *individual attitudes*, a combination of positive and negative beliefs regarding the outcomes of performing the behavior and evaluations of the consequences of these outcomes, and (b) the person's *perceived norms* of other people's opinions regarding the specified behavior (e.g., safer sex is good) and their willingness to conform to those views.

HIV prevention interventions guided by the TRA would promote one or more specific risk reduction behaviors and would motivate participants' intentions to adopt the behaviors by having them examine the pros and cons of changing and by exposing them to other persons, similar to themselves, who have favorable attitudes toward the new behaviors.

A third influential theory is the Transtheoretical Model of Behavior Change, also known as the Stages of Change (SOC) theory (Prochaska, 1994; Prochaska & DiClemente, 1986). The idea behind the SOC is that people usually alter their behaviors through a series of incremental steps, instead of all at once. The SOC literature names the first of these stages *precontemplation*, defined as the period where the person has not recognized that he/she has a problem (e.g., thinks heterosexuals cannot contract HIV) or has no interest in changing his/her behavior. The second stage is called *contemplation*. Persons in this category are aware that they have a problem and they are thinking about changing their behavior (e.g., are weighing benefits versus difficulties of cleaning their drug injection equipment). The third stage, called *ready for action* or *preparation for action*, includes persons who have decided to change their behavior but either have been practicing the behavior for less than one month or have been practicing it inconsistently (e.g., sometimes forgets to use condoms). The fourth stage is termed *action*, and includes persons who have successfully changed a behavior for a period of one to six months. The final stage, *maintenance*, is reserved for persons who have been practicing the new behavior consistently for longer than six months. The SOC theory recognizes that persons may relapse or oscillate between various stages in the continuum and be at different stages for various risk behaviors. HIV risk reduction interventions designed around the SOC are tailored for each participant and will include identification of their HIV-related risks, as well as their placement in the continuum of readiness to change for each risk. Interventions would employ stage-specific questions, discussions, and/or materials to encourage movement along the continuum of change.

A fourth influential theory is the Diffusion of Innovations Theory (DIT), initially developed to understand the spread and adoption of technological changes (Rogers, 1962). This theory proposes that innovations pass through particular communication channels among members of a social system over time. As with the SOC, the DIT proposes that innovations are adopted following a series of stages. These include: *knowledge*—where persons become aware of the innovation's existence (e.g., female condoms); *persuasion*—a period where persons form favorable attitudes toward the innovation (e.g., recommended by a trusted friend who uses them successfully); *decision*—entailing commitment to its adoption (e.g., purchases condoms); *implementation*—putting the innovation into practice (e.g., inserting condom prior to sex); and *confirmation*—reinforcement based on positive experiences with the innovation (e.g., application of the

condom was easy and partner did not object). The DIT further states that persons or groups vary in their willingness to quickly adopt a new idea or innovation and fall along a continuum of venturesome "innovators" and "early adopters" to more conservative "laggards." As greater proportions of a social network adopt an innovation, the innovation becomes normative and it spreads more quickly. HIV interventions using the DIT seek to identify sources of information (e.g., respected persons) trusted by the population of interest (e.g., gay men) and to use these sources to inform and persuade other members of the population to adopt the new behavior, often through endorsing or modeling the behavior to demonstrate its value and social acceptability.

## **Theory-Based HIV Behavioral Interventions**

The Health Belief Model, the Theory of Reasoned Action, the Transtheoretical Model of Behavior Change, and the Diffusion of Innovations theory are just four examples of a much larger number of conceptual frameworks that have been used to design HIV behavioral interventions (CDC, 2001b). Some interventions combine principles derived from multiple theories. The following examples illustrate how theories such as these have been used to design successful interventions.

The AIDS Community Demonstration Project was based on the Transtheoretical Model of Behavior Change (AIDS Community Demonstration Research Group, 1999). Its main goal was to assess the effects of a community-level intervention promoting condom use with main and non-main sex partners. The project was implemented in Dallas, Denver, Long Beach, New York City, and Seattle. Intervention settings included street outreach, public sex environments, and other community venues. Trained peer volunteers interacted with persons in these settings, identified their particular stage of readiness to adopt HIV risk reduction behaviors, and attempted to motivate them to change using a strategy tailored for their stage. As part of the intervention evaluation, over 15,000 interviews were conducted with injection drug users, female sex partners of male drug users, commercial sex workers, men who have sex with men, and other members of census tracts with high STD prevalence. By the end of the study, residents of intervention communities were shown to achieve consistently greater

levels of condom use with non-main partners than residents in the comparison communities.

Project RESPECT (Kamb et al., 1998) developed a brief counseling intervention based on a combination of the Theory of Reasoned Action and the Social Cognitive Theory. Their study was conducted in Baltimore, Denver, Long Beach, Newark, and San Francisco. It was implemented by local health department staff trained to carry out the intervention in inner city STD clinics. The goal was to compare the effects of an enhanced four-session interactive counseling approach, and a shorter twosession counseling approach, versus a didactic session typically used in STD clinics. The aim was to learn which approach was more effective in reducing high-risk behaviors and preventing new STDs. A total of 5,758 adult men and women were enrolled. Results showed that participants in both the four-session and two-session study arms reported significantly higher levels of condom use compared with persons in the standard didactic group. Counseling session recipients also developed 30% fewer sexually transmitted infections compared with participants in the standard comparison condition.

Based on hypotheses concerning the role of peer opinion leaders and the Diffusion of Innovations theory, Kelly et al. (1992) enlisted the assistance of bartenders at gay clubs in three communities in Mississippi and Louisiana to nominate popular opinion leaders. These opinion leaders were given intensive education in basic HIV epidemiology and prevention techniques, and in methods for delivering effective HIV prevention messages. They also participated in role-plays, discussions, and practice exercises to learn ways to cope with real-life problems in reducing HIV risk behaviors among gay men in the communities. Each of the trained opinion leaders then were asked to have conversations regarding HIV risk reduction with at least 14 different peers from their own social network at the gay bars. Of the 1,469 gay bar patrons who completed the baseline and post-intervention surveys, men from the intervention study arm reported significantly greater reduction in anal intercourse without a condom compared with the men in the comparison group.

Numerous other examples of effective theory-based interventions designed to reduce HIV risk behaviors can be found in the literature (CDC, 2001b; Neumann & Sogolow, 2000). However, use of behavioral theory alone is not a guarantee that an intervention will be effective. Other factors contribute to the relative success or failure

#### **Anthropology in HIV/AIDS Behavioral Research 469**

in reducing risk behaviors (CDC, 2001b; Kelly, 1995). For example, successful interventions typically have clearly defined goals and target audiences. Instead of delivering a series of HIV-related facts via a didactic lecture, intervention recipients should have opportunities to discuss their questions and concerns, as well as practice new skills and solve problems. Successful interventions are well planned, and allow sufficient time for delivery of all the required components. Intervention staff and other key support personnel are well trained, and supervisors carefully monitor and evaluate their work to ensure there is no drift or dilution away from the intended protocols. Successful interventions have sufficient resources, including appropriate numbers of qualified staff, financial resources, and administrative support. Interventions should reflect genuine problems in the target population, be culturally appropriate, and match gender or other special needs when appropriate. Finally, interventions should be feasible and acceptable to community members.

# **ANTHROPOLOGY IN HIV/AIDS BEHAVIORAL RESEARCH**

### **Anthropology in HIV Behavioral Intervention Research**

Despite early calls from within the field to translate their work into risk reduction strategies and behavioral interventions (e.g., Gorman, 1986; Herdt, 1987), there continues to be a noticeably low amount of anthropological influence in HIV behavioral intervention research. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) reviewed over 5,000 HIV reports in its Prevention Research Synthesis project (CDC, 2001b; Sogolow et al., 2002). Virtually none of the effective interventions identified in the Prevention Research Synthesis project's database were based on a theory growing primarily out of anthropology. In reviewing additional literature for this entry, we also found relatively few anthropologists appearing as lead authors or co-authors on publications describing intervention studies, accompanied by rigorous scientific evaluations. To date, the HIV/AIDS behavioral intervention research field appears to have been largely dominated by theories, methods, and perspectives primarily growing out of psychology, social psychology, health education, epidemiology, and medicine.

There are, however, a few intervention studies with a clear anthropological influence, especially in the area of HIV risk reduction associated with drug abuse. One example is a community based HIV prevention intervention designed for out-of-treatment injection drug users and their sexual partners (Weeks et al., 1996). Weeks and her colleagues designed a culturally enhanced intervention approach for Puerto Rican and African American women, and compared its efficacy with a standard drug risk reduction counseling intervention. The enhanced arm was designed to bring about behavior change by incorporating each group's key beliefs, values, and norms. The intervention study arm included discussion of traditional family roles, relationships, group pride, and ways use social resources and cultural values to help avoid HIVrisk situations. The results of Weeks et al.'s study were somewhat mixed. One the one hand, participation in the culturally enhanced arm appeared to lead to drug-related risk reduction for some subgroups. However, extremely high-risk drug injectors tended not to alter their behaviors, and many dropped out of the study altogether. Other examples of HIV and drug risk reduction intervention that incorporate anthropological perspectives include studies by Dushay, Singer, Weeks, Rohena, and Grubar (2001) and Trotter, Bowen, Baldwin, and Price (1996).

Nations and de Souza (1997) provided training to 126 traditional Umbanda healers in seven urban slums in Brazil concerning the biomedical aspects of HIV/AIDS, safer sex practices, avoidance of ritual practices where blood from different individuals might be co-mingled, and in the sterilization of cutting instruments used in rituals. Compared with 100 healers that did not receive the training, healers that participated in the training demonstrated statistically significant lower HIV prejudicial attitudes, along with increases in AIDS awareness, accurate HIV risk behavior knowledge, information about correct condom use, and willingness to use lower-risk alternative ritual blood practices.

As members of diverse research teams, some anthropologists have expanded upon their anthropological training and have used methods and perspectives from other disciplines, such as epidemiology, to conduct large behavioral surveys or to investigate the potential for HIV vaccine trials (e.g., MacQueen et al., 1999; Valleroy et al., 2000). Others have contributed anthropological methods for participant recruitment and for the design of intervention materials as part of larger multidisciplinary team efforts (e.g., Terry et al., 1999; Trotter et al., 1996). Stall, Paul, Barrett, Crosby, and Bein (1999) evaluated the effects of a safer sex intervention for gay men, conducted at a substance use disorder treatment agency in San Francisco. Stall and his colleagues randomized 82 men into a treatment arm consisting of a safer sex plus treatment disorder experimental condition, and compared with 65 men who received only the standard substance use disorder treatment. Using methods primarily drawn from epidemiology, the investigators found no statistically significant differences in unprotected anal intercourse between the two groups over five waves of data collection. However, they did find statistically significant reductions in unprotected anal intercourse in both groups compared with initial baseline levels.

### **Ethnography and HIV/AIDS**

Compared with intervention studies, anthropology has had a more prominent role in conducting formative cross-sectional research. Anthropologists have used ethnographic methods to investigate a very broad array of topics among diverse populations and geographic settings. The following examples discuss at least seven ways ethnography has been used by anthropologists to contribute to HIV/AIDS behavioral research.

**Descriptive Research.** Ethnographic studies, which generally employ cross-sectional research designs, can provide information that subsequently is useful for developing interventions or improving programs. Examples include research on sexuality (e.g., Parker, Herdt, & Carballo, 1991; Schensul & Schensul, 1998). Another example is MacQueen, Nopkesorn, Sawaengdee, Mastro, and Weniger's (1996) use of focus group methods to better understand alcohol consumption patterns, brothel attendance, and condom use among Thai military conscripts. Other descriptive studies have documented the effects of AIDS on persons and cultural groups (Herdt, Leap, & Sovine, 1991), have identified factors affecting how cultural groups understand the impact of the disease on their society (Farmer, 1992), and have helped explain cultural issues related to designing education and service delivery for those affected by or at risk for AIDS (e.g., Herdt & Boxer, 1991). Some other examples include studies by Bourgois (1998), Clatts and Mutchler (1989), Feldman (1995), and Varga and Blose (1996).

**Studies on Health-Seeking Behaviors.** Ethnography has been used to understand health-seeking behavior related to HIV/AIDS care, stigma, and willingness to reduce HIV risk-related behaviors. For example, Furin (1997) conducted a two-year ethnographic study of HIV seropositive gay men in West Hollywood. Furin reported that the majority (69.2%) of men in the study used some type of alternative therapy. The primary reason for seeking an alternative treatment appears to be dissatisfaction with biomedical therapies, but Furin suggests that other sociocultural factors may also be involved. In particular, AIDS activism in West Hollywood appears to promote the use of alternative therapy. This activism, the author proposes, allows gay men in the community to "become their own doctors" and reclaim power over their treatment and the technical sphere of AIDS.

Ethnography has provided a framework for understanding how HIV/AIDS prevention messages are perceived by intended target audiences (Nicoll et al., 1993). Other studies have described the process through which concerns about family or community response to one's HIV diagnosis has led to delays in seeking treatment. Early in the epidemic in Kenya, for example, AIDS was defined mostly in terms of commercial sex work, and today the disease is still strongly associated with prostitution. Moss et al. (1999) found that women who contract STDs usually are assumed to have participated in commercial sex work, and men who contract such an infection are thought to have been with a prostitute. Presenting oneself to a hospital for treatment of an STD may result in revealing the illness to neighbors and/or family, which can have tremendously adverse impacts on family life. Women who fear being labeled as prostitutes or losing their husbands are less likely to seek treatment.

**Correlates of Risk-Taking Behaviors.** Ethnography has been used to uncover rationales for both HIV risk and protective behaviors. For example, a number of studies have found that while commercial sex workers may use condoms with their clients, they remain at high risk of being infected with HIV because condom use with their boyfriends and husbands is not considered appropriate (Day, 1988; Varga & Blose, 1996; Waddell, 1996). Based on ethnographic interviews with key informants, Waddell (1996) found a variety of beliefs that affected reluctance to use condoms with the women's non-commercial sex partners. Some of these included the belief that they would be able to recognize if their husband or boyfriend had HIV; a willingness to risk HIV infection for some other desired purpose, such as having a baby or getting married; the belief that life will get better after

#### **Anthropology in HIV/AIDS Behavioral Research 471**

they quit sex work; overly optimistic comparison of their HIV risk with that of other women; and resignation to having no alternative. Waddell recommends that interventions address these beliefs and focus greater attention on non-commercial sex partners.

**Social Context and Life Circumstances.** Other investigators have examined contextual factors that affect HIV risk. Cochran (1989) found that an underlying cause of low HIV risk perception among some African American women appeared to be the existence of more immediate day-to-day concerns, such as survival needs, family demands, and economic pressures. Meyers and Ellen (2001) showed that HIV risk was viewed as just another part of life within an atmosphere of social violence among inner-city adolescents. Stratford, Ellerbrock, Akins, and Hall (2000) used ethnographic methods to study HIV attitudes and misconceptions, contact with commercial sex workers, and low condom use among 71 truck drivers in Florida. They found that risk was exacerbated by long hours driving, loneliness, along with drug and alcohol use. Sterk (1999) used participant observation and various ethnographic interview methods to study low-income urban women who use crack cocaine. She explored the women's circumstances and how they cope with them, including violence, HIV/AIDS, racism, sexism, and poverty. These studies on the context of HIV risk suggest that sex and drug behaviors should not be considered in isolation, but rather should be viewed as factors intertwined with other problems facing members of a community. Interventions should take into account the larger context of HIV risk.

Sterk's (1999) work is a vivid example of what Singer (1994) means when he describes HIV as part of a larger "syndemic" of closely linked health and social problems. The term syndemic is defined as "two or more afflictions, interacting synergistically, contributing to the excess burden of disease in a population" (CDC, 2000c). Examples of problems that commonly interact with HIV include alcohol and drug abuse, violence, joblessness, homophobia, racism, sexism, inadequate housing, insufficient health care, presence of other illnesses, and poor education (e.g., Cochran, 1989; Farmer, 1992; Singer, 1996; Sterk, 1999).

**Intervention and Program Evaluation.** Ethnography has been used to help evaluate existing HIV interventions, such as Hansen and Groce's (2001) assessment of the Cuban national HIV prevention efforts. Other investigators have used the methods to evaluate needle exchange programs. These efforts allow researchers to observe what happens to the syringes between the time that they leave the exchange and when they return, something that cannot be completely determined by lab testing of returned needles (Page, 1997). Singer et al. (2000) combined qualitative research methods with epidemiologic surveys and laboratory techniques to assess differences between neighborhoods in access to sterile syringes in three US cities. Their qualitative methods included use of focus groups, ethnographic descriptions of neighborhoods, diaries kept by injection drug users (IDUs) on their drug use and injection equipment, daily ethnographic visits with IDUs, and interviews.

**Research with Hidden Populations.** For it to be successful, the use of ethnography generally requires a closer contact with communities and respondents, compared with other research methods such as structured surveys. An advantage of this is that ethnographers may develop a more in-depth understanding of subtle aspects of communities and have more time to develop trust with community residents. This makes ethnography a useful tool for research with hidden subpopulations, groups that are not readily identifiable, socially stigmatized populations, or groups that wish to remain hidden (e.g., Latino men who have sex with men, or illegal drug users). Such groups not only may be at significant risk for HIV infection, but also may be under-represented in standard public health surveys and public health surveillance data sets.

For example, ethnographic study of homeless heroin addicts in San Francisco provided detailed descriptions of HIV risk behaviors among a group that would be very hard to reach using traditional survey methods (Bourgois, 1998; Bourgois, Lettiere, & Quesada, 1997). Because of the time invested in developing relationships and trust with the research participants, Bourgois not only was able to identify the risky practices of the subjects but also to discover the reasons behind them. Such understanding is necessary in order to develop effective interventions. Key informants told Bourgois that they often misrepresented their risk behaviors to paying quantitative interviewers who spent less time getting to know the community. These studies show how intensive ethnographic studies with small groups within a community may complement statistically representative structured surveys and epidemiological investigations with large samples (Herdt & Boxer, 1991; Wight & Bernard, 1993).

**Society's Perceptions of HIV.** Finally, ethnography has been used to better understand how societies view or portray groups impacted by HIV/AIDS. Farmer's (1992) research on AIDS in rural Haiti clarified how broad social conditions, particularly those related to poverty and political unrest, shaped the national response to the Haitian AIDS epidemic. Farmer also describes how the press in the United States may have exacerbated racism against Haitian immigrants by portraying them using images of "filthy squalor, voodoo, and boatloads of disease-ridden or economic refugees" (Farmer, 1992). Farmer argues that this led many Americans to believe that AIDS was pervasive throughout the Haitian populations, and may have formed the basis of misplaced accusations, particularly that Haiti was the birthplace of AIDS. Other examples discussing society's perceptions of groups heavily impacted by HIV/AIDS include Clatts and Mutchler (1989), Feldman (1995), Murray and Payne (1989), and Singer and Marxuach-Rodriquez (1996).

### **Development and Improvement of Qualitative Research Methods**

Although traditional ethnographic methods have formed the backbone of many anthropological studies, the challenges posed by HIV/AIDS have stimulated the development of new methods. Both traditional methods and newer qualitative research techniques have been adopted by other disciplines to such a great extent that it is now difficult to attribute them as "belonging" to any one field.

One example of these new methods involves "rapid assessment techniques" (see Beebe, 2001, for an overview). Rapid assessment does not refer to a single specific method, but rather to a set of approaches and tools for conducting research under time and resource constraints. As conceptualized within anthropology, these methods are designed to help investigators explore narrowly defined research topics more rapidly than is possible with traditional ethnography (Trotter, 1995). Rapid assessment techniques have been used to conduct formative and evaluative research for national and local HIV programs in settings as divergent as Nicaragua, South Africa, and England (e.g., Carey, 1994; Fenton, Chinouya, Davidson, & Copas, 2002; Weir, Moroni, Coetzee, Spencer, & Boerma, 2002). Researchers from other fields have contributed to the burgeoning rapid assessment methods field in HIV and other areas, including community psychology, epidemiology, international economic development, and sociology (Annett & Rifkin, 1995; Higgins et al., 1996; Scrimshaw & Gleason, 1992; Selwyn, Frerichs, Smith, & Olson, 1989; Wilson & Family Health International, 2001).

The AIDS Rapid Anthropological Assessment Procedures, authored by Scrimshaw, Carballo, Ramos, and Blair (1991), is an early and well-known example of an attempt to create a set of clearly described procedures for collecting formative data from communities. It provides guidelines for studying sexual behavior, other possible modes of transmission, as well as AIDS-related knowledge, attitudes, beliefs, and practices. Rapid assessment studies often compare data from several different sources (called "triangulation" in the literature). Some of the specific techniques used in rapid assessments include formal and structured and semi-structured interviews, direct and systematic observation, informal conversations with key respondents, personal diaries, and the collection of data from secondary sources.

Various groups have developed rapid assessment manuals using anthropological techniques for specific HIV research needs. Batchelor, Rossman Beel, and Freeman (2001) working with the Texas Department of Health and the CDC, and the California Department of Health Services (1998) both developed rapid assessment methods toolkits to help local jurisdictions conduct HIV needs assessments and to feed the results into local HIV prevention program planning. The World Health Organization (WHO), for example, developed a rapid assessment protocol for planning condom services (WHO, 1991). The WHO also produced a series of rapid assessment documents focusing on maternal and child health, family planning, injection drug use, sexual risk behavior, and psychoactive substance abuse among young people (WHO, 1993, 1998a, 1998b, 1998c). In part modeled from this work, the US Department of Health and Human Services developed the "Rapid Assessment, Response, and Evaluation" (RARE) project to collaborate with metropolitan governments to gather information for improving HIV prevention services among African American, Latino, and other populations disproportionately impacted by HIV in large urban areas in the United States (Needle, Trotter, Goosby, Bates, & Von Zinkernagel, 2000; Trotter, Needle, Goosby, Bates, & Singer, 2001).

Some commentators have expressed skepticism as to the validity of results produced using rapid assessment procedures, largely because of concerns that the short time frames may impose too many shortcuts and superficial understanding of complex issues (Bennet, 1995;

#### **Discussion and Future Directions 473**

Harris, Jerome, & Fawcett, 1997; Manderson & Aaby, 1992). Replicability and generalizability may not always be possible in rapid assessment studies, especially when dealing with the sensitive topics associated with AIDS research (Scrimshaw et al., 1991). The use of multiple sources of data, however, can help address some of these concerns (Beebe, 2001).

In addition to developing and using rapid assessment methods, anthropologists have refined techniques and software tools needed for the systematic collection and analysis of large qualitative data sets on HIV behavioral research projects. McLellan, MacQueen, and Neidig (2002) describe the steps needed to prepare and transcribe large qualitative data sets. MacQueen, McLellan, Kay, and Milstein (1998) and Carey, Morgan, and Oxtoby (1996) discuss the processes needed to reliably code and analyze qualitative data from multisite research projects. The needs of HIV behavioral research have stimulated further development of a variety of new qualitative data analysis software programs, including "CDC EZ-Text," "AnSWR," and "AFTER," each serving a variety of different qualitative research needs (Carey, Wenzel, Reilly, Sheridan, & Steinberg, 1998; Nova Research Company, 1998; Strotman, McLellan, MacQueen, & Milstein, 2002).

While HIV research needs may have encouraged the development of methodological innovations such as rapid assessment techniques or qualitative data analysis software, these tools have been used for a wide array of other purposes within and beyond public health. In that sense, anthropological efforts within HIV behavioral research have had broader "spin-off" benefits in producing methods and tools useful for investigating other research topics.

## **DISCUSSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS**

HIV/AIDS has become one of the most important challenges facing the contemporary world. There is not likely to be an effective vaccine in the near-term future. While anti-viral drugs have greatly reduced AIDS deaths in wealthy countries such as in Europe or North America, HIV medical care is very expensive, complex, does not eliminate the virus from the bodies of infected persons, and is largely out of reach for many impoverished subpopulations and countries. The epidemic has had catastrophic health and humanitarian impacts on the physical, social, cultural, economic, and political well-being of millions of people. The disease strips households and communities of valuable trained and skilled labor. In places such as Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Swaziland, Zambia, and Zimbabwe, heavy HIV burdens are exacerbating food shortages and increase the likelihood of famine (UNAIDS/WHO, 2002). Regional military conflicts, civil unrest, poverty, racism, gender inequality, stigma, and lack of access to affordable medical care may contribute to of the spread of HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS/ WHO, 2002). In addition to Sub-Saharan Africa and other countries with long-standing HIV epidemics, other nations, including the former Soviet states, Indonesia, Cambodia, China, and India, show alarming signs of increasing HIV incidence and prevalence (UNAIDS/ WHO, 2002). Because persons with AIDS are more vulnerable to opportunistic illnesses, HIV further complicates public health struggles to control different diseases such as tuberculosis, syphilis, and many other conditions.

Researchers from many disciplines have made advances in understanding the biological aspects and treatment of HIV, as well as in illuminating the individual and social conditions that foster its transmission. Taken together, the social and behavioral science disciplines have done a commendable job in helping to better understand the correlates of HIV/AIDS. Some disciplines, such as psychology, have played an especially notable role in developing and testing effective theorybased approaches for reducing HIV sexual and drug use behaviors.

In the past, the most prominent HIV research contributions from anthropology appear to be in the realms of ethnographic studies, and in the development of new approaches and tools needed for conduct of qualitative research. This is not surprising, because ethnography has been a traditional hallmark of the discipline. As applied within HIV behavioral research, ethnographic approaches have been used for a very wide range of purposes, including descriptive or formative research, studies among hard to reach populations, identification of factors associated with risk-taking and treatment-seeking behaviors, program evaluation, and in understanding how society reacts to the epidemic and views HIV-infected groups. Refinement of qualitative methods, such as the development of rapid assessment techniques or creation of new qualitative data analysis software, help researchers to more quickly obtain results needed for pragmatic response to the HIV crisis.

With some exceptions, to date anthropology has done a less impressive job in directly contributing to the development of actual interventions to reduce HIV risk behaviors. It should be noted, however, that descriptive studies indirectly have helped shape intervention efforts by providing basic knowledge useful for targeting and tailoring interventions to specific populations. Nevertheless, active involvement in the direct design of interventions largely has been left to psychology and other disciplines, whose theories of human behavior often have led to an emphasis on changing individual-level behaviors, beliefs, and personal circumstances. There is a recognized need for theoretical models and new intervention approaches that take into account larger social structural and cultural contexts that shape risk behaviors (Kowalewski, Henson, & Longshore, 1997; Sumartojo, 2000). We recommend that anthropologists should make a much greater effort to develop theoretical bases for designing and testing HIV risk reduction interventions targeting communities, social networks, and dyadic relationships. Anthropology has long been interested in the effects of social norms and cultural values on individual behavior. This is a promising area for future anthropological contributions. Identifying and conducting rigorous scientific evaluations of specific ways to change community values, social structures, and normative behaviors that support reduction of HIV risk behaviors, and identifying the specific community-level variables that most strongly mediate individual HIV risk behaviors, are examples of such potential contributions. This type of work would complement, but not replace, HIV prevention approaches that emphasize interventions with individuals or small groups.

Anthropologists should also seek out new and expanded opportunities to participate on multidisciplinary teams implementing HIV behavioral intervention trials. This includes the design and conduct of theory-based intervention studies that account for social and environmental context, constraints on choices, and potential ways to change risk behavior. They also can seek new ways to help transfer effective, rigorously tested interventions into HIV practitioner settings for widespread implementation. Anthropology faculty in academia should train their graduate students to design, conduct, and evaluate interventions using experimental research designs, in addition to the training they receive on ethnographic methods and analyses. Anthropology students also could profit greatly by seeking supplemental training in other disciplines, such as in epidemiology, psychology, or biostatistics.

It has been argued that the advent of HIV/AIDS was the single most important contributor to the growing role of anthropology in public health (Heggenhougen & Pedersen, 1997). Although medical anthropology was well established in prior decades, it was not until the midto late-1980s that utility of anthropological perspectives and methods became more visible within public health. The HIV/AIDS epidemic led to a return to the study of sexuality in anthropology and the recognition of the value of such research (Tuzin, 1991; Vance, 1991). Roles for anthropologists in public health have expanded. Anthropologists, along with other social and behavioral scientists, now serve a multitude of roles including acting as advisors, policy-makers, health educators, social workers, and administrators within AIDS control programs (Feldman, 1990; Holtgrave, Doll, & Harrison, 1997; King, 2000; Snider & Satcher, 1997; Roberts, Bansbach, & Peacock, 1997; Rugg, Levinson, DiClemente, & Fishbein, 1997). In short, not only has anthropology contributed to HIV research, but the importance of the disease has shaped the directions of the discipline itself. We believe this growth and diversification of roles can continue well into the future.

# **REFERENCES**

- AIDS Community Demonstration Projects Research Group. (1999). Community-level HIV intervention in five cities: Final outcome data from the CDC AIDS Community Demonstration Projects. *American Journal of Public Health, 89*(3), 336–345.
- Ajzen, I., & Fishbein, M. (1980). *Understanding attitudes and predicting social behavior*. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
- Andiman, W. A. (2002). Transmission of HIV-1 from mother to infant. *Current Opinion in Pediatrics, 14*(1), 78–85.
- Annett, H., & Rifkin, S. B. (1995). *Guidelines to rapid participatory appraisal to assess community health needs. Division of Strengthening of Health Services*. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization.
- Bandura, A. (1986). The explanatory and predictive scope of selfefficacy theory. *Journal of Social & Clinical Psychology, 4*(3), 359–373.
- Bandura, A. (1997). *Self-efficacy: The exercise of control*. New York: W. H. Freeman.
- Barnett, T., & Whiteside, A. (2002). Poverty and HIV/AIDS: Impact, coping and mitigation policy. In G. A. Cornia (Ed.), *AIDS, public policy and child well-being*: UNICEF Innocenti Research Centre. Retrieved November 26, 2002, from http://www.uniceficdc.org/research/ESP/aids/aids\_index.html
- Batchelor, K., Rossman Beel, E., & Freeman, A. (2001). *Community based assessment: A guide for HIV prevention workers*. Dallas, TX: University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center. Retrieved November 26, 2002 from http://www3.utsouthwestern.edu/ preventiontoolbox/assess/assess.htm