# 18 Emancipatory feminist theory in postcolonial India

Unmasking the ruse of liberal internationalism<sup>1</sup>

Ratna Kapur

The attack by liberal intellectuals on critical theory, which aims at introducing a more philosophical analysis into the reading and understanding of culture and other disciplines, has become a significant feature of liberal feminism in both the 'West' and non-West. The work of liberal feminist scholars such as Martha Nussbaum, characterize the way in which this attack has been choreographed in feminist scholarship.

I specifically engage with Nussbaum's views for two reasons. The first is to take on board the critique of some feminist scholars who have argued that the feminist challenge to liberal legalism has been at times guilty of 'straw-manning' its liberal target (Munro 2007: 51–54; Lacey 1998: 69). Secondly, Nussbaum has been academically engaged with India for many years, and written about the feminist liberal project in that context with considerable zeal and intensity. Given her defense of the liberal position as integral to the pursuit of social justice within the context of postcolonial India, her work becomes all the more significant with which to engage.

Nussbaum's most aggressive attack on critical theory is found in her polemical critique of Judith Butler's book Excitable Speech, in the February 22, 1999 issue of The New Republic, entitled 'The Professor of Parody'. Nussbaum attacked Butler for being highly theoretical, invoking jargon without adding clarity, and introducing no new ideas to feminist theory. She assailed Butler for being anti-political, embracing a 'hip defeatism', and a 'collaborator with evil' (1999: 45). Butler was pilloried for her impenetrable writing style, her daring to venture into an arena outside of her discipline – that is, law – her failure to produce a normative theory of social justice, and the lack of connection between her 'fancy words on paper' and feminist political struggle on the ground. According to Nussbaum, Butler's work was illustrative of how theory had become divorced from practice and hence of little value, amounting to nothing more than the couched ravings of intellectuals from their lofty ivory towers.

In this chapter, I do not provide a comprehensive response to Nussbaum's critique of Butler. My central concern is to challenge the way in which Nussbaum invokes the struggle of Indian feminists to justify her principal argument against critical theory as well as some of the claims made in this process about Indian feminism and liberalism's universal appeal.

### In defense of liberal internationalism

In 'The Professor of Parody' Nussbaum positioned herself as a spokesperson for the Indian feminist movement and the kind of theory with which Indian women lived and worked. She implied it was a theory that replicated the good theory of Catherine MacKinnon and refused to 'collaborate with evil', supposedly unlike Butlerian feminism. She argued Indian feminists were attracted to the MacKinnon position based on the idea of 'patriarchy' and men's sexual subordination of women. She argued that Indian feminists had to be more sensitive to women's material conditions and understood the need for practical solutions, the practical solutions that have driven MacKinnon's theory.

Nussbaum's position has been and continues to be based on a robust defense of what she has characterized as 'liberal internationalism' that no longer faces any ideological resistance in the post-Cold War era. In her text Sex and Social Justice, she developed an argument in favour of a capabilities approach to human development. Her theory of justice and human rights emerged from her reading of Amartya Sen's concept of substantial freedoms or capabilities, which he developed to address questions of justice and human development (Sen 1999).

The capabilities approach identifies 'a kind of basic human flourishing' based on a list of central capabilities drawn up by Nussbaum from which she generates some specific political principles. It includes the following ten criteria: to be able to live for a normal human life span; have good reproductive health, nourishment, and adequate shelter; move freely from place to place and be free from sexual violence; think, reason and do these things in a 'truly human way'; love, grieve, experience longing, gratitude and justified anger; form a conception of the good and critically reflect on how to plan one's life; live for and in relation to others and have a social basis of self-respect and non-humiliation; live with a concern for and in relation to animals, plants and nature; play, which includes laughing and enjoying recreational activities; and have control over one's political and material environment (Nussbaum 1999a: 40–41). These capabilities are construed as substantive freedoms and cannot be accounted for merely within the gross national product or determined in terms of income-deprivation. This approach emphasizes that the central goal of public policy must be to promote the capabilities of each citizen to be able to perform all of these important human functions. Each capability must be equally promoted by society in order to ensure an individual's claim to a good life in which 'the dignity of the human being is not violated by hunger or fear or the absence of opportunity' (Nussbaum 1999a: 40).

The capabilities approach considers people one by one, and does not lump them together in families or communities. The capabilities approach is also based on choice, where the government does not direct the citizen into acting in a specific way, but simply makes sure that the citizen has all the resources and conditions that are required for acting in those ways. Society is obliged to provide individuals with the basic infrastructure in order to enable them to make choices (Nussbaum, 1999a:45). Nussbaum advocates this capabilities approach for all members of humanity, a liberal internationalism that is not just confined to one's own context. As she states, 'I believe that individuals have moral obligations to promote justice for people outside their national boundaries and that their governments do also' (Nussbaum 1999a: 6).

Nussbaum's position is based on two primary assumptions about humans that lie at the heart of the liberal tradition as articulated by Immanuel Kant and John Rawls – all individuals have worth because of their power of moral choice; and secondly, society and politics must respect and promote this choice and equal worth of the choosers (Nussbaum 1999a: 57). Nussbaum acknowledges that there are some important critiques of liberalism put forward by feminists that must be confronted if her argument is to be persuasive. The first is the idea that liberalism is based on individualism, and treats the subject as existing a priori to social relations, outside of any social ties (Nussbaum 1999: 59). Nussbaum's response to this critique is that feminists should be concerned about the fact that liberalism has not been nearly individualist enough when it comes to women and family. Nussbaum relies on J. S. Mills' argument in the Subjection of Women to illustrate how this liberal thinker was in fact concerned with the well being of the individual as well as the individual family members and argued that law should be used to advance the fair treatment of every individual including women in the family.

The second critique put forward by feminists is that the liberal vision is abstract and formalistic, and does not take account of important differences such as class, caste, religion, gender or race. Such an approach could for example justify segregation. Nussbaum argues that it is a mistake to think that liberalism has been committed to ahistorical abstraction, even though some liberal thinkers have been guilty of such an error. She argues that liberal philosophers have rejected such a notion of pure formal equality and that liberalism affords individuals the right to demand equality from their government in ways that take into consideration material prerequisites – that it aims at 'equality of capabilities'. A true liberal position on equality, promotes equal worth, which requires that society work towards promoting the capacities of people to choose a life that accords with their own thinking.

A third feminist critique focuses on liberalism's emphasis on human beings as reasoning subjects. Although reasoning has helped women to secure their equality, it does tend to place too much emphasis on something that is considered a male trait, and denigrates traits such as emotion and imagination that are traditionally associated with females (Nussbaum 1999a: 72). Nussbaum does not reject the liberal emphasis on reason, though she does reject excessive male rationalization. She seeks to create a liberal construction of emotions that represents a balance between reason and feelings as opposed to emotions, which are imposed on women through tradition, convention, and patriarchal social conditioning (Nussbaum 2004).

Nussbaum argues that the thing women must most mistrust is habit, disguised in the form of tradition, as it has invariably been used to their disadvantage. Women need to recognize that tradition has often been articulated by men and used to subordinate women to do men's bidding. And the most regressive traditions are located in the 'Third World'. She proclaims that:

We [American women] would never tolerate a claim that women in our own society must embrace traditions that arose thousands of years ago – indeed, we are proud that we have no such traditions. Isn't it condescending, then, to treat Indian and Chinese women as bound by the past in ways that we are not (Nussbaum 1999a: 37)?

Nussbaum is willing to suffer the label of a Western imperialist, rather than to 'stand around in the vestibule waiting for a time when everyone will like what we are going to say' (Nussbaum 1999a: 30). She states categorically that any tradition that objects to the universal obligation to protect human functioning and its dignity and the dignity of women as being equal to that of men, is unjust. Liberalism must be used to challenge tradition and the social formation of sexual desire to ensure that women think first before they give themselves away to another. Reason thus becomes the antidote for unreflective and habitual action.

#### 260 Ratna Kapur

A recurring refrain in Nussbaum's argument is that the liberal position is not *per se* flawed, but that there has been a profound inconsistency in what liberalism stands for and how it has operated in relation to women. However, her responses fail to engage with two very significant concerns. The first is the role of power and how it operates at multiple levels and not in a linear manner. Nussbaum fails to pay attention to the subtle operations of power and how liberal feminism cannot begin to bring about political repair through the application of one simple antidote – inclusion. We need to understand the role of power in law and its ability to shape and inform different liberal values and rights. The second shortcoming is her failure to engage with the work of postcolonial feminists, postcolonial theory and subaltern scholarship, which have exposed the limitations of liberalism, in particular, its inability to transcend assumptions about the 'Other' on which legal reasoning and the liberal project are based.

### **Feminist theory in postcolonial India**

Nussbaum's assumption that postmodernism is not relevant among feminists in India, or that feminists have already dismissed it, betrays a naive assumption that feminist theorizing in India operates on the basis of consensus and with one common end in view. In fact the strength of the movement has been the ability of Indian feminists to debate, disagree and keep pushing the boundaries, always recognizing that the 'evil' resides in the dominant structures of power that we seek to challenge, transform or alter. It cannot be assumed that Butler's theories have no relevance in India or the 'Third World', just as it cannot be assumed that feminists in India completely align with the liberal feminism of Nussbaum. Indeed, the postcolonial feminist critiques have exposed liberalism's historical entanglements with the project of Empire and thus challenge its claim to be an exclusively liberating or emancipating project. The history of the colonial encounter illustrates how the rule of law and the liberal premise on which it is based has been used to subjugate and not just to liberate. This double-consciousness enables Indian feminists to develop a devastating critique of liberal internationalism while at the same time, not fear that such a critique will produce pessimism or push us into a theoretical abyss. Dialectics, skepticism and debate have been a part of philosophical thought in the subcontinent, and not something that is feared or directed towards one end or used to sustain one, exclusive normative vision.

In her critique of Butler's work, Nussbaum makes several assumptions about feminist theory in India. She states:

In India, for example, academic feminists have thrown themselves into practical struggles, and feminist theorizing is closely tethered to practical commitments such as female literacy, the reform of unequal land laws, changes in rape law (which, in India today, has most of the flaws that the first generation of American feminists targeted), the effort to get social recognition for problems of sexual harassment and domestic violence. These feminists know that they live in the middle of a fiercely unjust reality; they cannot live with themselves without addressing it more or less daily, in theoretical writing and in their activities outside the seminar room (Nussbaum 1999: 37-38).

Any feminist in India reading the above statement would be puzzled and surprised at its casual assumptions. It reflects a lack of insight into the kind of feminist theorizing being conducted in India. Many academic feminists in India theorize the material condition. But they do not draw exclusively on one theory, nor for that matter do they unanimously reject and condemn Butlerian feminism.

Feminist academics in India engage in a whole host of other theories precisely because the myopia and liberal feminist pieties advocated by Nussbaum have been largely unsuccessful in the Indian legal domain. Feminist legal scholarship as it is emerging in India has engaged with liberal theories but it has also drawn on new and alternative theories and scholarship, including subaltern studies, postcolonial feminist theory, postmodernism of the Butler variety as well as various philosophical traditions present in the subcontinent. It is drawing on a broad range of disciplines outside of law to produce dynamic ideas about justice and social reform, partly because of the failure of the legal academy to put forth an adequate theory for the empowerment of women in India (Sarkar 1996; Mani 1998). This point belies Nussbaum's critique of Butler for daring to venture beyond the boundaries of her own discipline – that is, philosophy. Indeed, some of the most important theoretical work being done by feminists in India that is informing the development of feminist legal theory emerges from the disciplines of Indian philosophy, sociology and history.

Nussbaum's reference to our 'practical struggles' and achievements in the form of rape laws or sexual harassment laws and literacy, are left uninterrogated and dehistoricized. Feminists in India have become acutely aware of how practical-oriented solutions, aimed at the empowerment of all women, can have a reactionary potential that has revealed itself under the emergence and rule of the Hindu Right, a nationalist political movement aimed at establishing a Hindu State in India (Hansen and Jaffrelot 2004; Cossman and Kapur 2001; Basu et al. 1993; Bhargava 1998). When the BJP led the coalition government from 1999–2004, their proposals included advocating the death penalty for rape, and communalizing the crime by largely targeting Muslim men for the rape of Hindu women. Their support for broad-based guidelines against sexual harassment in the workplace produced a conservative backlash against women's sexual behavior with complainants succeeding only if they demonstrated that the harassment violated principles of decency, morality and modesty. A complainant was more likely to succeed in her grievance if she demonstrated an appropriate lack of familiarity with sex.2 And their move towards banning images regarded as vulgar and obscene in the name of women's rights to equality served to compromise women's rights to bodily integrity, freedom of speech and expression. The rights to equality, secularism and free speech, rights which all 'real' liberals would support, were successfully deployed by the Hindu Right as part of its strategy for combating violence against women. Such agendas have not proved liberating for women, and are increasingly leading many feminists to turn to theories that assist in developing a more specific and contextual analysis.

By simply listing decontextualized and circumscribed reforms in the name of women's rights as proof of the achievements of Indian feminists, Nussbaum provides a skewed picture. The movements to reform the laws relating to women's rights in India cannot be held out as either a simple success or failure. Nussbaum's analysis does not reveal the complex and contradictory nature of these struggles and their outcomes. For this reason, some feminist theorists in India have turned to discourse theory and postmodernism, enabling a more complex understanding of law and social reform and highlighting the contradictory results they may produce for women.

Nussbaum also makes some unfortunate assumptions about women in India, often stripping them of claims to agency and subjectivity until they have fully embraced the

### 262 Ratna Kapur

liberal project. It is assumed that only liberal individualism can enable the subject. Indeed there is an unfortunate moment in Nussbaum's article (1999: 42) where, carried away by her animus against Butler, we read:

Well parodic performance is not so bad when you are a powerful tenured academic in a liberal university. But here is where Butler's focus on the symbolic, her proud neglect of the material side of life, becomes a fatal blindness. For women who are hungry, illiterate, disenfranchised, beaten, raped, it is not sexy or liberating to reenact, however parodically, the condition of hunger, illiteracy, disenfranchisement, beating and rape. Such women prefer food, schools, votes, and integrity of their bodies. I see no reason to believe that they long sadomasochistically for a return to the bad state. If some individuals cannot live without the sexiness of domination, that seems sad, but it is not really our business. But when a major theorist tells women in desperate conditions that life offers them only bondage, she purveys a cruel lie, and a lie that flatters evil by giving it much more power than it actually has.

This sentence betrays an utter lack of imagination regarding women who exist in disadvantaged situations. It assumes that they are defined only in terms of their disadvantage and parody has no role to play in their lives as a liberating tool. I cannot help but think of how Hindi commercial films provide the ultimate parodic space for millions of people in India (and elsewhere), rich and poor, where the subversive song and dance sequences are replayed over and over again in the gullies and mohallahs (alleys and neighborhoods) and mansions, long after the film is over (Bose 2007; Ghosh 2007, 1999).

Nussbaum's assumption about women in disadvantaged situations as victims devoid of choice or agency fails to engage with a vast sea of critical scholarship that has been produced on this issue in the postcolonial context. An important feature of postcolonial theory is its challenge to the unitary liberal subject. The liberal project has been successfully built on the idea that the subject is atomized, decontextualized, ahistorical and reasoning. 'He' is also a universally valid subject.

The postcolonial project affords the possibility of conceptualizing the subject in ways that directly challenges the autonomous, reasoning subject of liberal rights discourse (Nessiah 2003). It focuses on the resistive subject  $-$  that is  $-$  one who produces resistance in coercive circumstances, a deeply layered and multifaceted subject. It is at this juncture that postcolonial theory joins with subaltern studies (Said 1983:  $v-x$ ). The subaltern studies project further complicates our understanding of the subject who is excluded by the liberal project and the imperial narratives of history (Guha and Spivak 1988; Sarkar 1985). The subaltern project exposes how certain voices have been excluded from the dominant narratives and telling of history. The project regards hegemonic history as part of modernity's power/knowledge complex, which in the context of colonialism, has been deeply implicated in imperialism's violent encounters with other regimes of power (McClintock 1995:6). In the context of law, the subaltern project also brings a normative challenge to the assumptions about universality, neutrality and objectivity on which legal concepts are based, exposing the cultural specificity of such assumptions.

One stream of the subaltern studies project influenced by the work of Michel Foucault came to focus on contesting the Eurocentric, metropolitan and bureaucratic systems of knowledge (Chakrabarty and Bhabha 2005; Chakrabarty 2000; Chakrabarty 1995). The new tradition was concerned with challenging all traditions and disciplines defined within the logic and rationale of the Enlightenment project. One aspect of this new tradition was to unmask the universal subject of liberal rights discourse. It destabilized the humanist subject and brought into critical consideration a host of other categories, including gender, class, ethnicity, and race. Subaltern studies did not remain preoccupied with the idea of a peasant rebel as an autonomous political subject who writes her own history as suggested by some scholars (Sen 2005). It shifted away from economic analysis as the primary zone of power that characterized an earlier stream of subaltern studies, and began to unpack the multiple sites and locations of power through a discursive and textual analysis. The scholarship continued to expand and began to address and challenge the neo-imperialism of the late twentieth century and problems of agency, subject position, and hegemony in an era of globalization (Ludden 2002; Chakrabarty and Bhabha 2002; Lal 2002; Mignolo 2000).

The subaltern subject provides a normative challenge to the subject of liberal rights discourse. It is a subject who occupies an ambivalent position, whose resistance or presence can be read in different ways. The subaltern project analyzes the terms by which the formerly colonized subject comes to engage with her past, as well as how she challenges the simple dichotomies of us and them, of the invader and the native. She denaturalizes the liberal subject, revealing its instability and culturally specific location. At a more radical level, this subject brings about a conscious normative challenge, intent on resisting the assimilative gestures of the imperial and liberal project, producing a subject that is quite distinct and unlike the sovereign autonomous subject of liberal rights discourse. Indeed it is this ambivalence which provides a central lens through which subject constitution in law in the postcolonial world can be understood.

Nussbaum is well known as a sensitive and acute observer and someone who tries to live up to the philosopher's ideal of self-awareness. Yet she has apparently not fully escaped from a patronizing First World response to women in the Third World, who are presented by her only as victims, only as women in situations of starvation, poverty and abuse. This reveals a lack of sensitivity to the way in which women live in India and elsewhere, despite their situations of impoverishment and need. In Nussbaum's well meaning stereotype, there can be no 'Bandit Queen', nor understanding of those dress rehearsals in which the wretched of the earth prepare to tackle their oppressors. When sex workers perform the roles of Hindi film heroines among themselves and their friends, this may be a very modest gesture of self-recovery, but nonetheless an important one. The hijra (transsexual) dances and sings publicly in the streets despite the grueling poverty and disadvantage in which most of them live. How would Nussbaum respond to Nepali women keen to participate in the Miss Nepal Beauty pageant 2008 and prevented from doing so by Maoist women intent on 'cleaning up culture' and 'obscenity' in Nepali public space? Or the raid on women activists in Kathmandu who sought to protest the violent and brutal slaying of a woman human rights defender in July 2008, by threatening to strip in public as a way of drawing attention to the case and issues of violence against women? How would she respond to them as ('Third World') performers in a pageant space, or public protestors shattering her neatly sculpted image of the victim-subject? Would they also stand accused of not being sensitive to their sisters' material condition? Why is 'material condition' assumed to refer only to women's experience of oppression and impoverishment? Perhaps Nussbaum would characterize the pageant women performers as 'sad' for finding what she describes as 'sexiness in domination' or the women activists as misguided in their strategies and in need of support from their liberal feminist sisters?

Pleasure and performance are not 'evil' per se as Nussbaum would have us believe, whether in her reading of Butler or in the lived material reality of women's lives in India or elsewhere on the subcontinent. They are extremely important dimensions to women's lives in postcolonial India. Indeed the very recognition of this aspect of women's reality subverts Nussbaum's projection of such women as existing always and exclusively as poor, unhappy and unfortunate. It is this image that has burdened feminist politics in India and elsewhere as it exposes little understanding of the material and social conditions of women's lives, the very condition that Nussbaum prides herself on comprehending and from which her theory emerges. If her theory is built on the image of the suffering and emaciated 'Third World' woman, no wonder there is a longing for a new politics and theory that would disrupt if not demolish this uninformed (and I might add, unsexy) representation. Such an image exists in the work of those who require a victim on which to build their theories, rather than to provide a theory with which to empower 'the victim'.

Nussbaum is concerned that subversion is insufficient if not accompanied by a normative theory of social justice and human dignity. Without such a theory, all acts of subversion would be regarded as the same – they would all be good. Thus subversiveness through parodic performance to 'proclaim the repressiveness of heterosexual gender norms' would rank equally with subversive performance to evade compliance with tax norms, or treating fellow human beings indecently. However, if power operates from multiple and dispersed locations, then the articulation of a single logic or normative theory would serve only to obscure or mask this reality. Subversion and subversive practices operate to expose the obfuscatory function of metanarratives, and universalizing theories and explanations. Subversion contains within it the seeds of altering the meaning of the world and providing a story that will challenge if not displace dominant narratives. The most obvious evidence of such efforts is in the writing of subaltern history and the continuing work of the Subaltern Studies group in India.

Efforts at articulating an alternative theory of social justice and human dignity are laudable. But the meaning of these theories will ultimately be determined by one's historical and political context. In India, feminists assumed that we had a clear-cut theory of equality for women and disadvantaged groups. However, the meaning of equality has been altered by the Hindu Right, not through force or coercion, but through the use of liberal rights discourse as well as democratic means and processes, in ways that operate against persecuted or discriminated groups. More specifically, they have advocated a model of equality based on formal equal treatment and sameness that has encouraged attacks on special measures that exist in favor of religious minorities, in particular for Muslims. This result does not mean we must evict equality and find an alternative model of social justice. But, it does reveal the ways in which equality is a site of discursive struggle, a place where different visions of the world are fought out, and a site in which we have engaged and must continue to engage.

Neither Butler's idea of subversion nor the postcolonial idea of the resistive subject amount to a surrender or acceptance that it is impossible to alter structures of power and subordination; that the best we can hope for is a space of resistance, which will not lead to institutional change. Subversive politics pushes change by inches rather than by leaps and bounds. When we read against the grain viewing a formula Hindi commercial film, we can derive pleasure conscious of the fact that there are certain normative arrangements in place that will resist such a reading. Yet the act of reading against the grain has the potential for altering the meaning and location of pleasure and destabilizing the surety of normative structures that determine what does or does not constitute pleasure. In concrete terms, when a sex worker identifies with the main protagonist in Muzafar Ali's classic film Umrao Jaan, which recounts the life story of an exquisite courtesan of nineteenth century Lucknow, she participates in providing a subaltern reading of the script and hence alters its dominant meaning.<sup>3</sup> She is reading the film in a way that validates and brings to the centre her own marginalized existence.

## Alternative intellectual traditions

Given the limits of the liberal internationalism, it is necessary not to reinforce a 'Yes, I know. But ... ' politics for fear that we may end up in a nihilistic space or remain stuck in a politics of despair (Brown 2001: 16). At this juncture, there is a critical role to be played by the postcolonial feminist theorist as well as space available to engage with different philosophical articulations about emancipation drawn from the various intellectual traditions of the subcontinent. This role is defined by at least three exercises. Firstly, it is necessary for advocates of the liberal intellectual tradition to turn the gaze back on the tradition, and ask how it has been implicated in creating the mess we are in. What is the role of this project in producing the hatred and animosities today? An honest and urgent critique of this tradition is warranted rather than a self-laceration driven by guilt or a flight from the homeland to more pristine niches on the globe to 'do good' or help the 'wronged ones', including the poor, victimized 'Third World' woman.

A second exercise is to be willing to engage with theories and critiques of the liberal project. Such engagements should not merely be restricted to incorporating suggestions with the goal of simply 'fixing' the project, but to be willing to engage with the dark and dirty side of liberal internationalism, acknowledge its more and many histories, and seriously engage with alternative or excluded ideas about emancipation that cannot be captured by the liberal imaginary (Mahmood 2007).

A third related exercise is both a task and a tool – to seriously look for and learn from alternative traditions. The subcontinent is also home to some extraordinary philosophical and intellectual traditions. Unfortunately, philosophical traditions other than from the West have invariably been regarded as exotic, esoteric or rooted in religion. This view fails to recognize the religious tone of intellectuals in Western traditions, or appreciate the significant distinction made in non-Western traditions between philosophy and religion (Matilal 1986). Some of these traditions are immersed in systems of logic, inference and dialectics that can be traced from well before the Buddha, who was an agnostic,<sup>4</sup> to Amartya Sen, a noble laureate in economics. Sen traces this tradition of dialectics, debate and even skepticism in the *Argumentative Indian* which, he concludes, illustrates that everything is open to question (Sen 2005).

While these traditions are in no way homogenous, I end by briefly postulating at least three distinct aspects they posses. Firstly, the critique of epistemology and  $\text{metaphysics} - \text{the very basis from which knowledge proceeds} - \text{is an integral and not}$ renegade feature of some of these traditions.<sup>5</sup> Challenges to epistemological issues in the West have often been castigated as ravings of the post-modern, post-Enlightenment intellectual as demonstrated in Nussbaum's critique of Butlers work. Yet this level of inquiry existed well before the post-modernists became the nuisance.

A second distinction is the notion of the Self as indivisible  $-$  one, organic, non-fragmented whole, who ultimately is not exclusively just an intellectual, nor just an activist, nor this or that, but all of these. She pursues an emancipatory vision of all through the knowledge of the self and her relationship with the 'Other', which is integral and potentially liberating, rather than frightening, fearful and exclusive. This idea of non-dualism was expounded by the brilliant philosopher Sankara in the ninth century.<sup>6</sup>

And finally, neither history nor time are unilinear in such traditions. The consolidation of unilinear, progressive teleological and Eurocentric history as the dominant mode of experiencing time and being is the hallmark of liberal internationalism. In this project, others' present are seen as Europe's past while Europe's present is posited as others' future. It is a construction where nations and individuals only attain maturity when they are fully conscious of themselves as subjects of unilinear and progressive history, and it is only such individuals who can realize freedom. Those placed outside of this history have no claims or rights and may rightfully be subjugated even if to bring them into the stream of the Eurocentric history of Europe.

Some philosophical traditions posit time very differently. Firstly, they centre the individual within the framework of reflection, rather than reason or rationality, in order to bring about discernment. Nussbaum argues that rationality or reason provide women the tools with which to cast off tradition, but she does not simultaneously inquire into whether the liberal project has indeed been a liberating project, nor does her work provide any space for pursuing such an inquiry. It is simply regarded as *per se* progressive, as a step forward in the pursuit of female emancipation. Alternative traditions shift away from any notion of progress, of linear movement and a sense of moving forward from a dark, more primitive era that has been the hallmark of liberal thought. Instead, they recognize that there is consistent change, where the relationship with time and space is critical because there is no linearity. Progress does not mean a march forward, but as an exercise of going deeper, here and now.

Each of these aspects can provide another metaphysical basis from which to articulate a project of emancipation and freedom. They offer ways in which to emancipate feminist politics from the constraints of liberal internationalism and its deeply problematic claims. It is a move to pursue goals of social justice, freedom and equality from a different historical and metaphysical trajectory and to help stage the sorely needed intellectual insurrection that the contemporary moment and progressive politics demands.

#### Notes

- 1 This is an author revised version of the article that appeared as 'Imperial Parody' in *Feminist* Theory, 2(1), 2001.
- 2 See the decision of the Supreme Court of India, Apparel Export Promotion Council v. A. K. Chopra (1999) 1 SCC 759, where the woman succeeded in her sexual harassment claim partly on the grounds that she was single and would not have knowledge about matters of sex and therefore could not have welcomed the conduct.
- 3 *Umrao Jaan*, played by Rekha, the darling of Indian movie-going audiences, is the story of a woman who performs as a dancer and singer at the 'Kota' of Khanum Jan, the madam, and develops a number of liaisons with the nobles of Lucknow, a major city in northern India. Her exquisite singing and dancing skills as well as her talent in composing Urdu poetry attracts the attention of the Royal Court of Avadh. She develops a relationship with one nobleman, and the story of their affair is set against the backdrop of the 1857 'Indian Mutiny'.