# **Maori**

#### **Mason Durie**

## **ALTERNATIVE NAMES**

New Zealand Maori, Tangata Whenua o Aotearoa.

# **LOCATION AND LINGUISTIC AFFILIATION**

Maori are the indigenous people of New Zealand. Of Polynesian descent, the first voyagers arrived in New Zealand around 1000AD in a series of planned migrations from Eastern Polynesia (probably Tahiti), by way of Rarotonga. Although there are minor tribal dialectal differences, there is a single Maori language that has similarities with other Polynesian languages especially Hawaiian, Tahitian, and Rarotongan.

## **OVERVIEW OF THE CULTURE**

Maori society was essentially tribal. There were forty or fifty major tribes (*iwi*) and many more smaller tribal groups (*hapu*) who occupied specific territories and had distinctive customs and dialects, though subscribing to a single common language. While tribes were largely autonomous, complicated social networks were formed to gain political and strategic advantages and so leading to a dynamic set of interacting alliances.

Within all tribal narratives emphasis was placed on a close affiliation with the surrounding landscape and distinctive landmarks or waterways often reinforced tribal identity. This symbiotic relationship with the natural environment was reinforced in the creation story. *Rangi* (the sky father) and *Papa* (the earth mother) were forced apart by their children (the forests, oceans, winds, plants, fish) who subsequently challenged parental authority. By personifying the laws of nature, human motivation was attributed to the elements and by the same token, the human condition was linked to the often harsh natural environment.

Perhaps for that reason tribes were constantly on guard for the unexpected and placed great store on maintaining mana (authority) over their own territories and people. Attempts by other tribes to diminish mana, either through plunder or trading insults, led to war and, not infrequently, cannibalism. The ultimate act of asserting mana was to devour the heart of a foe. But there were also more subtle forms of retaliation including the imposition of a makutu or spell on an individual or group.

Loss of life through warfare was a common hazard, greatly exacerbated by the 19th century musket. Changes to the definition of Maori make it difficult to draw comparisons over time, but there is strong evidence of a substantial and sustained increase in the Maori population since 1900 when, at 45,000, extinction had been widely predicted. For the past three census takes it has been possible to determine the number who are descended from a Maori as well as the number who elect to identify as Maori. Both are valid measures though identity is regarded as the more meaningful measure. In the 2001 census 604,110 people indicated they were descended from a Maori, and 87%, 526,281, actually identified as Maori (Statistics New Zealand, 1998).

While accounting for some 14% in 2001, by 2051 the Maori ethnic population will almost double in size to close to a million, or 22% of the total New Zealand population. By 2051 33% of all children in the country will be Maori, and Maori in the working age group, 15 to 64 years, will increase by 85% (Statistics New Zealand, 1998).

Yet though the younger age groups will continue to grow, an equally significant change will be an increase in the number of older Maori. By 2051 the proportion of Maori elderly would have risen from the current 4% to 15%. Though still youthful, the population will have a larger cohort of over 60 year olds. At ages 65 and over, the growth is projected to be in excess of 300%.

Like many New Zealanders, Maori are mobile. Following World War II urbanization resulted in major migrations from country areas to towns and cities and by 1976, more than 8% of Maori were living in urban settings, a quarter in the greater Auckland area. Emigration overseas has also become a significant trend, some 30,000 Maori now being recorded as residents in Australia. More recently still, there has been a shift in internal migratory patterns away from urban areas where unemployment is high and back to tribal areas such as Northland, from where grandparents had moved some thirty or forty years earlier.

Over the past two decades, in addition to demographic change there has been a dramatic revitalization of Maori language and culture with a renewed sense of commitment to indigenous values and knowledge. It has been accompanied by a demand for increased autonomy and a parallel rejection of policies of assimilation and dependency. Maori providers of health and education services have been part of the trend and their emergence has resulted in pressure for theoretical and methodological frameworks that can incorporate Maori perspectives as well as scientific practice.

# **THE CONTEXT OF HEALTH: ENVIRONMENT, ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND POLITICAL FACTORS**

### **Epidemiological Trends**

Prior to European colonization of New Zealand, the Maori population was thought to have reached a steady state, around 150,000 to 200,000. The major life threatening diseases were associated with pneumonia, physical injury, child birth, and gastro-intestinal disorders. In the 19th century when settlers from Europe began to arrive, there was a dramatic epidemiological shift. Infectious diseases, such as typhoid fever, tuberculosis, measles, and influenza took a heavy toll. A lack of natural immunity combined with the impacts of new lifestyles and diets led to high mortality rates (in 1854 there were over 4,000 deaths during an epidemic of measles) and depopulation. The situation was aggravated by a high number of deaths attributable to muskets—an innovation that altered the nature and scale of tribal encounters and battles with the British imperial troops.

As depopulation was arrested and population increases began to occur disease patterns changed again. Although still a major problem until the middle of the 20th century, tuberculosis as a major cause of illness and death was eventually to give way to heart disease, cancers (especially cancer of the stomach, lung, cervix), noninfectious respiratory disorders, and metabolic disorders especially diabetes and obesity. By 1976 it was also apparent for the first time that mental health problems were a significant cause of morbidity, reflected in high hospital admission rates, a high prevalence of conduct disorders, alcohol and drug misuse, and quite recently, high rates of youth suicide.

Although Maori life expectancy has improved substantially over the past century and is now 68 years for men and 73 years for women, Maori and non-Maori disparities in health are evident in almost every disease category and in admission rates to hospital. Similarly, the increased burden of disease experienced by Maori, as measured by disability adjusted life years (DALYS) is approximately 75% greater than the age-standardized DALY rate for other New Zealanders (excluding Pacific peoples) (Ministry of Health, 2001). At the same time, if Maori standards of health are benchmarked against the health standards of earlier generations of Maori and the health standards of other comparable first peoples, it is clear that major improvements have occurred so that the Maori population is not only more numerous than at any time in history but also enjoys greater longevity and a higher overall standard of health.

## **Socio-Economic Circumstances**

Collectively Maori are over-represented in lower socioeconomic groupings, but between Maori individuals there is also considerable variation that is not immediately obvious when comparisons between Maori and non-Maori are made. At an aggregated level the gap between Maori and non-Maori is wide but there is also an emerging gap between Maori who are employed and well qualified and those who are unemployed with poor prospects of employment. Health status and housing standards are likely to be reflected in that differential. On the other hand, it is unusual for middle class Maori to live entirely apart from wider family networks. Each Maori family group is inevitably represented across the social strata (Henare, 1994). In this regard it is often difficult to separate socio-economic conditions from cultural and historical factors, even though some individuals may be relatively well-off.

Educational achievement is probably the most significant determinant of socio-economic advancement and although achievement levels lag behind non-Maori, there are signs that Maori are making gains. The establishment of alternatives such as Köhanga Reo (Maori language early childhood education centers) have provided an incentive but within the mainstream higher Maori participation rates in early childhood education have also been evident, growing by over 30% between 1991 and 1993. However, despite the fact that over 40% of all Maori children under 5 years of age are enrolled in early childhood services, the growth has failed to keep pace with the increase in enrollments of non-Maori so that the disparity is not reducing and may even be increasing (Ministry of Education, 1998).

Educational underachievement is directly linked to work force participation and Maori levels of unemployment bear out the relationship. As well, and perhaps of greater significance, Maori unemployment has mirrored macro-economic swings and has been exacerbated by the move toward free market policies that occurred in New Zealand after 1984. Up until 1987 Maori were more likely than other New Zealanders to participate in the labor force. However, by 1988 a sudden rise in unemployment had occurred, and continued for a further 4 years reaching 27% in 1992. Non-Maori unemployment had also increased but the rates were relatively low (4% rising to 7%) so that the disparity was high, and remains so (Maori unemployment is now close to 14%, non-Maori around 5%). Of particular concern is the relatively high youth unemployment rate; in 1996 the overall unemployment rate was nearly 8% for all New Zealanders but 20% for 15–19 year olds and 30% for Maori aged between 15 and 19 years (Childrens Agenda, 1999).

Because of their dependence on employment, income levels for Maori are significantly lower than for non-Maori. But there are other reasons that contribute to Maori economic disadvantage including long term unemployment, disability and sole parent households (New Zealand Government, 1994). Maori are over-represented in all categories of beneficiaries, have uptake rates of more than three times the non-Maori rate for the domestic purposes benefit and are twice as likely to receive an unemployment benefit. In 1996 one in every two Maori women aged fifteen and over received a government benefit compared with one in five non-Maori women, and 45% of Maori women lived in households where the annual income before tax was \$30,000 or less (Te Puni Kokiri, 1999).

### **Political Position**

In 1840 the British Crown signed the Treaty of Waitangi with Maori tribes. The Treaty guaranteed continuing property rights and a degree of tribal autonomy. However, it was largely ignored and by 1975 Maori discontent with the appropriation of land, forests and fisheries, together with concern about the erosion of Maori language and culture, led to the establishment of the Waitangi Tribunal. The Tribunal has the authority to investigate grievances against the Crown for breaches of the principles of the Treaty and is able to recommend remedial action to the Government. Over 800 claims have been lodged. A continuing emphasis on the Treaty of Waitangi has created irritation for many non-Maori New Zealanders but, in the absence of a written constitution, it remains a pivotal focus for Maori especially in defining their position in modern New Zealand and their relationship with the government. The Treaty is included in health legislation and imposes an obligation of government agencies to actively address Maori health issues.

Maori have been active participants in the indigenous rights movement and are increasingly seeking opportunities for greater autonomy, not necessarily as an independent nation-state but in decision-making over Maori resources, the delivery of services to Maori, and full participation in the affairs of the nation. Progress has been considerable. In the current parliamentary system, out of 120 members of parliament, 17 are Maori and seven seats are reserved for members who represent Maori electorates. Maori are also represented in the judiciary, within the state services, in all professions, and in the diplomatic corp.

### **Medical Practitioners**

Traditional healing was practiced by *tohunga* who were skilled in the use of *rongoa* (treatments derived from plant products) and the recitation of *karakia* (chants used to encourage healing through spiritual pathways). The Tohunga Suppression Act 1907 prohibited traditional healing methods but after the repeal of the legislation in 1964 there has been a resurgence of traditional methods and a number of healers have established large practices. There is a greater spirit of co-operation between medical and customary approaches to healing with mutual agreement that all treatments have limitations and a combined approach may heal mind and spirit as well as body. Traditional healing as part of the modern health care system is now recognised by government and some contracts have been offered for traditional healing services (Ministry of Health, 1999a).

The earliest Maori medical practitioner was Maui Pomare. He graduated from the American Medical Missionary College in Chicago in 1899 and was followed in 1904 by Te Rangi Hiroa, the first New Zealand trained Maori doctor (Durie, 1998). There are now 198 Maori medical practitioners, a little over two percent of the total registered medical practitioners (Health Workforce Advisory Committee, 2002). Important to the recruitment of Maori doctors have been affirmative action programs, first introduced at the University of Otago Medical School in 1900, and continued at the University of Auckland. Some 10 to 15 positions are reserved for Maori students each year. To be eligible for the scheme, students are required to demonstrate Maori descent, some involvement with Maori communities, and support from their own tribe.

In 1999 Maori medical practitioners formed an association, Te ORA, that provides a professional focus for Maori doctors and arranges scientific and cultural enrichment programmes. It also acts as a conduit for information relating to Maori health including opportunities for practice within Maori communities. Maori medical practitioners occupy a range of positions in hospital and private practice. Generally their clinical skills are indistinguishable from other practitioners but in addition they tend to be competent in Maori language and custom and are able to modify practice to accommodate Maori health perspectives. Their active involvement in Maori communities in a variety of roles inevitably confers expectations that will provide leadership beyond the health sector and not infrequently places demands on them that are difficult to meet.

# **CLASSIFICATION OF ILLNESS, THEORIES OF ILLNESS, AND TREATMENT OF ILLNESS**

Customary Maori disease classification systems recognized *mate tangata* (i.e., diseases caused by human error or misadventure) and *mate atua* (diseases that could not be accounted for in rational terms). Underlying both types of illnesses was a system of knowledge based on *tapu* and *noa*. There are many interpretations of *tapu*. Now, most emphasize a sacred quality and are linked in some way to gods or divinities. Anthropologists and missionaries for example conceptualized *tapu* as a product of religious observations, highly spiritual and somewhat apart from everyday life. They were inclined to overlook the more practical goal of survival and environmental adaptation.

A more utilitarian view of the purpose of *tapu* was proposed by Dr. Te Rangi Hiroa. He drew a connection between the use of tapu and the prevention of accidents or calamities, implying that a dangerous activity or location would be declared *tapu* in order to prevent misfortune. In his opinion, the conferment of *tapu* was linked to healthy practices. *Tapu* was a type of public health regulation, basically concerned with the avoidance of risk, protection of the environment and its resources, and the promotion of good health. *Noa* was a term used to denote safety; harm was less likely to come to anyone who entered a *noa* location, ate food rendered *noa* by cooking, or touched a *noa* object. In Maori society the concepts of *tapu* and *noa* remain integral to Maori world views and color contemporary Maori attitudes to illness and injury.

Of equal importance has been the emergence of Maori health perspectives. The best known, te whare tapa wha, compares health to a four-sided house in which there is balance between spiritual, physical, intellectual/emotional, and family domains (Durie, 1985). This particular model has been incorporated into health planning as well as the delivery of health services and the construction of monitoring tools, such as outcome measures. Maori health workers adopt a more holistic approach to treatment and healing though as a result are often in conflict with the narrower goals of clinical agencies and funding arrangements that fail to recognize spiritual dimensions, or the links between health status and wider socioeconomic environments.

## **SEXUALITY AND REPRODUCTION**

Sexuality in early Maori society was not treated with the same level of prudishness that Victorian settlers displayed although marriage and conception were more closely scrutinized. Arranged marriages were not uncommon,

#### **Health through the life cycle 819**

and certain women (puhi) were carefully cosseted until political alliances could be negotiated. Sexual unions between members of different tribes required permission from elders although were by no means infrequent and were sometimes actively encouraged for strategic purposes. Because birth rights were jealousy guarded and lines of descent prized for their connections to illustrious ancestors, parenting was far from arbitrary and coupling required tacit community approval. From genealogical records it is possible to conclude that childbirth occurred at relatively young ages, and that polygyny was practiced, though within narrow circles and usually to maintain a secure system for child care or to uphold family honor. The failure of a young wife for example to bear children might lead her husband to marry her sister, with the sanction of her own family. Sometimes a second wife or husband was procured for political reasons and occasionally prisoners of war were forced to enter into marriages both as a sign of victory but also as a token of reconciliation. The new spouse, though a former enemy, was usually afforded the full rights of marriage.

In modern times sexual activity among young Maori is common by fourteen years of age and contraception is used less frequently than for non-Maori. Sexual risk taking stands in sharp contrast to other elements of lifestyle and development and may be exacerbated by alcohol and drug use (Ministry of Health, 1997b). Termination of pregnancy is still regarded as offensive since it breaks a line of descent, though it is by no means infrequent. There is also some circumstantial evidence that homosexuality was practiced in pre-European times without attracting discrimination, and homosexuals were known as takatapui (Te Awekotuku, 1991).

## **HEALTH THROUGH THE LIFE CYCLE**

## **Pregnancy and Childbirth**

Fertility rates for Maori have declined sharply since 1964 and rates between Maori and non-Maori women are now similar (2.4 and 1.9 children respectively). However, Maori mothers are considerably younger. The average age for the first birth is 19 years, compared to 29 years for non-Maori. The potential health risks associated with younger mothers is compounded by the increasing number of sole parent households. In 1996 about 43% of Maori women with dependent children were sole parents (Te Puni Kokiri, 1999). Maori children under 5 years are more likely to live in one-parent households than non-Maori; in 1996 there were as many as 23% (Davey, 1998). Although that does not necessarily mean the children are more at risk than they would have been if there were two parents, children in two parent families are more likely to have a mother who is in the labor force. As a consequence, income levels for sole parent families are low. As it is, over half of all Maori children under 5 years live in households with incomes in the bottom two quintiles.

Interestingly, hospitalizations for complications of pregnancy, childbirth, and the puerperium are only slightly higher among Maori than non-Maori (1.2) and are lower for perinatal conditions (0.8) (Ministry of Health, 1999b).

### **Infancy**

Although the Maori infant mortality rate declined more rapidly over the past half century than the rate for non-Maori, it remained significantly higher at 11.6 per 1000 compared with 5.3 per 1000 in 1996. Sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) accounted for the major difference but there are signs that the mortality rate is falling for both Maori and non-Maori, due mainly to a reduction in SIDS since 1996 (Ministry of Health, 1999b). During an active campaign to reduce SIDS a number of risk factors were highlighted including smoking, lack of breast-feeding, the prone position, and sleeping with the baby. Prematurity still remains a significant problem for Maori infants. It appears to be associated with younger mothers, smoking, poorer antenatal care, and economic hardship.

## **Childhood**

In Maori children under the age of fifteen years there is an over-representation in disability statistics; 16% as against 11%. And under the age of 5 years, Maori children are more than twice as likely to be hospitalized, most often because of respiratory diseases. Hearing impairment, though less prevalent than a decade ago is still significantly more common among Maori preschoolers, about twice as many fail hearing tests; and hearing loss is usually detected later at about 4 years compared to 21 months for a European child (Ministry of Health, 1998a). Most telling, in 1994 the mortality rate for Maori under the age of 15 years was 125 per 100,000

compared with 68 per 100,000 for non-Maori. Rheumatic fever, an uncommon disease in most developed countries continues to affect Maori children at rates that approximate those of industrialized countries a hundred years ago. Current rates for Maori are about 50–70 per 100,000 per year for Auckland children aged 5 to 14 years (compared with 2 per 100,000 for European) (Ministry of Health, 1997b).

There is also some evidence that the rates of physical abuse toward Maori children are high and that the capacity of family to provide adequate care is taxed. The large number of Maori children who are admitted to hospital because of accidents, including burns, for example is one indicator while the fact that fewer than a half of all Maori children under the age of 5 years are accessing early childhood care and education or that a third of Maori school leavers will have no qualification are others.

### **Adolescence**

While mortality rates and hospital admissions tend to be lower for youth and young Maori adults, the health risk behaviors are high. They include smoking, alcohol and drug misuse, motor vehicle accidents, suicide, and attempted suicide. Between Maori and non-Maori the risks are similar but the rates show disproportionately high consequences for Maori, especially Maori males. The major cause of death remains motor vehicle accidents, often associated with alcohol use. The 1997 mortality rate for all New Zealanders was 14.1 per 100,000 population (Ministry of Health, 1998b); Maori rates, previously higher, have now converged with non-Maori. But the Maori and non-Maori rates for suicide have moved in different directions. Suicide was rare among Maori but over the past decade the rates for both groups have increased. An analysis of the suicide rates for the period 1957–91 showed an overall lower Maori rate; it was not until 1987 that Maori youth suicides had reached similar levels to non-Maori (Skegg, Cox & Broughton, 1995). By 1990 Maori male rates had risen to 10 though non-Maori rates had risen even more to 35. But by 1993 the differences in youth suicide between Maori and non-Maori males had virtually disappeared, both rates being around 33 per 100,000 (Skegg, 1997). Maori rates have escalated even further so that in 1997 the Maori male suicide rate (26.8 per 100,000) was 28% higher than non-Maori while the Maori female rate (8.6 per 100,000) was almost 60% higher than for non-Maori

females (Ministry of Health, 2001). Factors thought to be relevant to the increase include deculturation, family adversity, social disadvantage, and a significant mental health problem in adolescence (Durie, 2001).

There have been few estimates of mental disorders within the community but a cohort study among 18 year olds concluded that the prevalence of mental disorders among Maori youth was exceptionally high. The mental health state of 115 Maori 18 year olds was assessed. Higher risks of disorder than non-Maori on all measures of disorder were shown. Overall 55% of Maori met criteria for at least one disorder in comparison to 41% of non-Maori. Maori males emerged as the group with the highest rate of disorder attributable to the elevated rates of conduct disorder and substance abuse disorders (Horwood & Fergusson, 1998).

Although striking, neither hospital admission rates nor community estimates of mental disorder give a comprehensive picture of either the prevalence of poor mental health or mental health status generally. Other indicators should also be taken into account. Young Maori are, for example, disproportionately represented in prisons, forensic services, child health camps, supervisory care, women's refuges, alcohol and drug services, and injury services (Dyall, 1997).

## **Adulthood**

Deaths from stroke have been relatively stable for most New Zealanders but rates for Maori have fluctuated in an upward direction since 1988 and are now about a third as high as for non-Maori. Diabetes occurs more frequently amongst Maori, with a death rate of 47.4 per 100,000, compared to 10.3 per 100,000 for the total population (Ministry of Health, 1998b). For Maori and other New Zealanders the main causes of death are heart disease and cancer. While Maori mortality rates for both conditions have improved, the disparities are still significant. Mortality rates from ischemic heart disease are 257 per 100,000 for Maori and 150 per 100,000 for all New Zealanders (including Maori) while the gap between Maori and non-Maori death rates due to cancer has actually widened since 1988 to 348 per 100,000 compared to 250 per 100,000 (Te Puni Kokiri, 1998).

Since the mid-1970s mental health problems have emerged as a major health concern. Maori first admission rates to psychiatric services had surpassed non-Maori rates for all age groups by 1974. Not only are the rates

#### **Health through the life cycle 821**

of admission different but Maori patients also have different needs, receive different diagnoses, enter hospital through different pathways, and have higher rates of readmission. Between 1984 and 1993 the rates for first admissions for Maori men and women had been steady, 120 per 100,000 for women and 180 per 100,000 for Maori men. But readmission rates increased, greatly for men (64%) and significantly for women (28%). While Maori women and non-Maori women had similar rates of first admission over the decade, Maori male rates have been consistently higher by about a quarter than non-Maori rates.

Drug and alcohol abuse and psychosis accounted for 32% of all Maori first admissions. Admissions for schizophrenia had increased as well and by 1993 were two or three times higher than non-Maori rates and rates for Pacific peoples. Schizophrenia, affective disorders, and other psychotic disorders made up 40% of Maori first admissions and 78% of readmissions (Te Puni Kokiri, 1996).

### **The Aged**

Despite several generations of Western influence, Maori society generally retains a positive view toward aging and older people (kaumatua), affording them status and at the same time expecting them to fulfill certain defined roles on behalf of the whanau (family) and hapu (tribe and community). In order to meet those obligations, however, kaumatua must contend with a range of issues that impact on their health and material well-being. In other words, the cultural role cannot be isolated from the conditions in which older Maori live.

Although the great majority of older Maori are not in dire circumstances, there is nonetheless a relatively high rate of disadvantage, poverty, and material hardship levels being around three or four times those of non-Maori. This has major implications because the proportion of older Maori is going to increase quite rapidly over the next two or three decades.

Age related disability is more likely among older Maori than non-Maori, affecting one in three (Ministry of Health, 1994). Major causes of death for this age group include coronary artery disease, cancer, and respiratory diseases, while the common reasons for hospitalization include respiratory disease, cancer, hypertensive disease, coronary heart disease, cataracts, stroke, and diabetes. In a survey of 400 older Maori men and women,

self-assessed health status suggested a generally positive attitude toward aging, despite high levels of disability and a myriad of health problems (Te Puni Kokiri, 1997). The finding may reflect the positive roles older Maori play in their communities as carriers of culture and representatives of family and tribe. In the survey, higher standards of health were significantly associated with active participation in tribal affairs and strong cultural affiliations.

An important consideration for Maori society will be how to maintain positive roles for older people in the face of increased numbers and higher levels of deculturation. If kaumatua are valued for their cultural leadership, an urban cohort may struggle to meet obligations if their material circumstances do not permit full participation, or their health prevents active involvement, or they have not been inducted into the culture and are therefore not able to provide leadership. For many now in the 40–60 years age group, traditional kaumatua roles may never be seriously entertained. That in turn will have implications for the ways in which Maori elderly might participate in society, both Maori society and the wider New Zealand society.

## **Dying and Death**

Maori views on death and dying tend to be philosophical. Death is an essential part of the life cycle and even though grief is unconstrained there is a sense of inevitability. Hospice care for the terminally ill is an increasingly acceptable alternative, but families prefer to nurse relatives at home, especially when it is obvious that death is imminent. If death has occurred away from family oversight there is sometimes a sense of shame and a fear of reproach for not providing adequate care.

Following death the body is usually taken back to a tribal cultural centre (a marae) for a three or four day period of mourning (the tangihanga). It is important that the body is intact. Unless the coroner insists on autopsy, permission for post-mortem is likely to be withheld; if it does occur the return of all body parts is imperative. For similar reasons, the harvesting of body parts remains highly controversial, possibly a reflection of earlier times when an enemy could inflict a final insult by desecrating a slain corpse. However, because Maori are overrepresented as potential recipients of donor organs, recent attempts to encourage a more permissive attitude have led to a reconsideration of that position, guidelines have been developed that will offer some safeguards against cultural offence (Te Puni Kokiri, 1999).

During the tangihanga, the deceased is addressed as if still alive and close family members, as well as others, spend their time sitting and sleeping around the coffin. Grief is openly expressed as elders offer farewell laments, encouraging the hovering spirit of the deceased to join other family members who have died. A sense of union with the wider world of the departed is established, diminishing somewhat the impact of loss and reinforcing the boundary between the living and the dead. Most families have traditional burial sites (urupa) and avoid cremation. But urbanization has often made it difficult to travel back to rural areas and in many cases contact with tribal relatives has been lost, so burial in a local cemetery occurs.

As a final tribute, children born around the time of death are often named for that person. Continuity has been restored to the family life cycle.

## **REFERENCES**

- Children's Agenda. (1999). *Child policy briefing paper*. Auckland: New Zealand Children's Advocacy Trust.
- Davey, J. (1998). *Tracking social change in New Zealand from birth to death iv*. Wellington: Institute of Policy Studies, Victoria University.
- Durie, M. (2001). *Mauri Ora the dynamics of Maori health*. Auckland: Oxford University Press.
- Durie, M. (1998). *Whaiora Maori Health development* (2nd ed.). Auckland: Oxford University Press.
- Durie, M. (1985). 'A Maori perspective of health'. *Journal of Social Sciences and Medicine, 20*(5), 483–486.
- Dyall, L. (1997). 'Maori'. In Pete M. Ellis & Sunny C. D. Collings (Eds.), *Mental Health in New Zealand From a Public Health Perspective*, *Public Health Report Number 3*. Wellington: Ministry of Health.
- Health Workforce Advisory Committee. (2002). *The New Zealand Health Workforce A Stocktake of Issues and Capacity 2001*. Wellington: Author.
- Henare, D. (1994). 'Social policy outcomes since the Hui Taumata'. In *Kia Pümau Tonu, Proceedings of the Hui Whakapümau Maori Development Conference*. Palmerston North: Maori Studies, Massey University.

- Horwood, L. J., & Fergusson, D. M. (1998). *Psychiatric disorder and treatment seeking in a birth cohort of young adults*. Wellington: Author.
- Ministry of Health. (1994). *Four in ten: A profile of New Zealanders with a disability or long-term illness*. Wellington: Author.
- Ministry of Health. (1997a). *Primary prevention of rheumatic fever*. Wellington: Author.
- Ministry of Health. (1997b). *Rangatahi sexual wellbeing and reproductive health*. Wellington: Author.
- Ministry of Health. (1998a). *Our children's health key findings on the health of New Zealand children*. Wellington: Author.
- Ministry of Health. (1998b). *Progress on health outcome targets 1998*. Wellington: Author.
- Ministry of Health. (1999a). *Standards for traditional Maori healing*. Wellington: Author.
- Ministry of Health. (1999b). *Our health our future Hauora Pakari, Koiora Roa the health of New Zealanders*. Wellington: Author.
- Ministry of Health. (2001). *Priorities for Maori and Pacific health evidence from epidemiology*. Wellington: Author.
- Ministry of Health. (2001b). *Suicide trends in New Zealand 1978–98*. Wellington: Author.
- New Zealand Government. (1994). *Report submitted by the New Zealand Government to the United Nations world summit for social development*. Wellington.
- Skegg, K. (1997). Suicide and Parasuicide. In Ministry of Health (Ed.), *Mental health in New Zealand From a public health perpsective*. Wellington: Ministry of Health.
- Skegg, K., Cox, B., & Broughton, J. (1995). Suicide among New Zealand Maori: is history repeating itself? *Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavia, 106*, 1–7.
- Statistics New Zealand. (1998). *New Zealand now Maori*. Wellington: Department of Statistics.
- Te Awekotuku, N. (1991). *Mana Wahine: selected writings on Maori womens art, culture and politics*. Auckland: New Womens Press.
- Te Puni Kokiri. (1996). *Ngä Ia o te Oranga Hinengaro Maori—trends in Maori mental health 1984–1996*. Wellington: Ministry of Maori Development.
- Te Puni Kokiri. (1997). *Oranga Kaumatua: the health and wellbeing of older Maori people*. Wellington: Ministry of Maori Development.
- Te Puni Kokiri. (1998). *Progress toward closing social and economic gaps between Maori and Non-Maori*. Wellington: Ministry of Maori Development.
- Te Puni Kokiri. (1999). *Hauora o te Tinana me ona Tikanga: A guide for the removal, retention, return and disposal of Maori body parts, organ donation and post-mortem*. Wellington: Ministry of Maori Development.
- Te Puni Kokiri, Ministry of Womens Affairs. (1999). *Maori Women in Focus Titiro Hängai Ka Märama*. Wellington: Ministries of Maori Development and Womens Affairs.