CHAPTER 16

# **Controversy Regarding High-Frequency Trading**

The major advances in speed of communication and ability to interact took place more than a century ago. The shift from sailing ships to telegraph was far more radical than that from telephone to email!

-Noam Chomsky

s we described at the beginning of Part Four, HFT came into the public's Aconsciousness through controversies surrounding it. Most of the arguments against HFT strike me as being arguments made by people who are either ignorant of the facts or motivated by self-interest to present biased and flawed information to the public. The kinds of criticisms generally ignore the differences between the various types of HFTs, confuse various elements of market structure with the practice of HFT, and conflate high-speed trading (and, often, quant trading in general) with HFT.

The criticisms of HFT seem to gravitate around four major ideas. According to detractors, HFT:

- 1. Represents unfair competition, creating a two-tiered system of haves and have-nots.
- 2. Manipulates markets and/or engages in front-running other investors.
- 3. Causes structural instability and/or creates additional volatility in markets.
- 4. Has no social value.

We will address each of these arguments in order, with the primary goal of separating fact from fiction.

# Does HFT Create Unfair Competition?

In 2009, Andrew Brooks, head of U.S. equity trading for T. Rowe Price, said, "But we're moving toward a two‐tiered marketplace of the high‐frequency arbitrage guys, and everyone else. People want to know they have a legitimate shot at getting a fair deal. Otherwise, the markets lose their integrity."1 The idea behind this argument is that superfast computers, algorithms, and telecomm setups are all very expensive and unavailable to the average person, and they create a two‐tiered system where HFTs have a huge advantage. This is not an accurate assessment of the current state of the markets. There are three reasons why, and we will go through each of them here.

# The Role of Speed in Market Making

Markets need market makers, just as manufacturers and consumers need distributors. There have always been market makers, and you can't have a properly functioning market without them. Furthermore, market makers have always had to be fast, because of the adverse selection problem associated with passive trading, which we covered in Chapter 14. In the past, speed advantages were obtained by a privileged tier of traders who were allowed to be insiders of the exchange. They used to be called locals, floor traders, specialists, and so on. Now, speed advantages are earned competitively on a level playing field, and this represents serious progress in leveling the playing field dramatically compared to the state of markets in years gone by.

The markets are more egalitarian today than they ever have been in their history. We have already given the examples from the early 1800s, when a carrier pigeon was winning technology, providing those that invested in it a serious speed advantage. In the early days of Wall Street, firms who were more proximate to the physical exchange had superior speed and access advantages. Later, those that had telephones before others had an advantage. And so on. The advantage that a big bank had over the average investor was bigger by orders of magnitude in 1929 than in 2009. In 2009, the advantage of Getco, among the very fastest in the HFT world, over the average online brokerage customer was on the order of a fraction of a second. Even on a very busy day, the advantage gained by such an edge in speed is trivially small. Compare that with the advantage of a firm that had personnel on the exchange floor 30 years ago, trading in real time, while a typical retail investor would check end‐of‐day prices the next morning in the newspaper!

When advantages are gained in a fair game, on a level playing field, this is not an unfair competition issue, nor is it a two‐tiered system issue. It is a *competitive* advantage. Brooks' comments can be taken to mean that people who are smarter, and who invest capital in expensive infrastructure that makes them better able to compete, have an unfair advantage over everyone else. But by that standard, Warren Buffett has an unfair advantage over everyone else by being earlier to the table on a good idea. He has extra access to information, he is smarter, and he has analysts who do a better job than others are able to do of processing information. Why wouldn't that reduce the integrity of the markets? This analogy extends to all fields where competition is present. The New York Yankees can afford to pay any player any amount they want to in order to acquire his services, thereby building a more talented team than many others. Not all players choose to play for them, and the Yankees are clearly not assured of success by virtue of having the highest payroll in their sport. Formula One racing teams are not all equal in funding or talent. Some have better drivers and engineers, they engage in better R&D, and they end up winning more races as a result. The reality is that none of this is unfair. It is basic capitalism: If you are willing to take a risk, you might get a reward.

It would be unfair if some players were being prevented from taking risks and having a chance at rewards. But this is clearly not the case with HFT. Anyone can get colocation space for servers. Anyone can get top‐of‐ the‐line hardware and fast communications networks. There was an incident in 2012, in which the NYSE was justly punished for making certain datasets available only to some HFTs. But the point is that NYSE was in violation of extant rules (Rule 603(a) of Reg NMS, specifically), which make it clear that *anyone* who wants this special data can get it. They were fined, and the issue has been put to bed.2 It is clear that firms that wish to compete must invest a lot of capital in infrastructure. They also have to acquire the skills to compete. But that's true for almost any venture.

Moreover, investment in massively expensive infrastructure does not guarantee success. I won't name names, but I know many HFTs that have sunk millions of their own and investors' money into infrastructure and have absolutely nothing to show for it except red ink. This demonstrates that paying for the kind of speed we discussed in Chapter 14 does not guarantee profits. It merely puts a trader on a level playing field with other traders attempting to do similar things. And, as is the case in any fair competition, there are winners and losers. But it's instructive when we see losers, because it demonstrates that there is no "club membership" that an HFT receives by spending large sums of money, which entitle it to low‐risk profits. Investment in good real estate, good technology, smart people, and other sources of potential advantage are exactly that: an investment that might pay off or might not.

#### The Purpose of Speed

The second reason that the claim of a two‐tiered system is wrong is that HFTs do not use their fairly earned competitive advantage to compete with investors, but rather with each other. HFTs (particularly market makers) are in the business of facilitating investor orders, which means that they take the opposite side of these orders. As demonstrated in Chapter 14, obtaining a speed advantage over other HFTs is important to managing the adverse selection problems associated with passive trading.

It is incorrect to claim that a trader who does not want to accumulate a significant net position, and who prefers to end the day with no positions at all would be competing with an investor who has a time horizon measured in weeks, months, or years. Indeed, HFTs are enormous net providers of liquidity, while investors are net consumers of it.

This is borne out by the numbers. The enormous energy and cost expended on speed by HFTs can yield a strategy with a speed that can be measured. It comes to around \$0.001 per share in U.S. equities, as mentioned earlier. The fastest traders in the market can earn profits in that range. Yes, of course they trade a lot of shares, but as we showed in Chapter 13, even in aggregate, HFT profits in U.S. equities are just over half of what even a single medium‐sized retail U.S. equity brokerage firm earns.

Let's contrast these economics with those of a good statistical arbitrage trader. Such a firm can earn approximately \$0.01 to \$0.02 per share. In this case, the extra \$0.001 per share earned by having better infrastructure is useful, but only at the margin. In the case of a longer‐term investor, one with a return target measured in several (or many) dollars and tens of percentage points, earning an extra \$0.001 per share on a typical trade does not move the needle. This is especially true because they don't trade all that often.

Comparing the economics of HFT to the economics of longer‐term investors is another way to demonstrate that there is little or no competition across these types of participants. Instead, each has a role in the market's ecosystem. The competition among HFTs exists because they are competing with each other to interact in the least adverse way with non‐HFT order flow.

#### A Philosophical Point

Every advantage in investing, in particular in alpha‐driven investing, is about speed. Whether it is getting data faster, processing the information faster (or even processing the information *better*), or executing orders more quickly, investment ideas make money only if other people have similar ideas, *after*

you have implemented yours. This is true of deep value investing as much as it is true of HFT investing.

This is a fundamental statement about alpha, and it ties in with the definition of alpha given in Chapter 3: Alpha is all about timing. In particular, it is about realizing value before others. Whether you are a long‐term active investor like Warren Buffett, a statistical arbitrageur, a trend‐follower in futures markets, or an HFT, you make money only when your longs go up and/or your shorts go down. This is only the case when other investors, in aggregate, follow in your footsteps. Perhaps this is the most important point to consider of all: Successful investing and trading rely inherently on a correct anticipation of the future aggregate behavior of other investors and traders. There is nothing special about anticipating someone's trading versus anticipating someone's longer‐term bets.

In sum, it's hard to see any merit in the idea that HFT is unfair or creates a two‐tiered marketplace. HFTs do have some advantages over the average person, but then again, so does every person with an above‐average IQ, or even an above‐average expenditure of time and money on analysis of investment or trading decisions. That advantage, in every class of active investing from long‐term money management to HFT, is fundamentally about speed. Specifically, it is about getting into positions before other people get the same ideas, and getting out before it is too late to retain profits. This leads directly to the second question about HFTs.

## Does HFT Lead to Front-Running or Market Manipulation?

HFTs are accused of front‐running investors. This is a topic that understandably generates a lot of heat. But unfortunately, it also generates very little by way of credible examples to examine. As far as market manipulation, in the rare cases that the arguments get specific, detractors point to such practices as *quote stuffing*, which involves placing and canceling huge numbers of orders in order to confound others into making mistakes. Another favorite of critics is that "their [HFTs'] computers can essentially bully slower investors into giving up profits—and then disappear before anyone even knows they were there,"3 which usually doesn't get further explanation. Events that are entirely unrelated to HFT, such as Facebook's troubled IPO in 2012, have been deemed by some in the press and public to be an HFT manipulation problem.

The manipulation claim seems to have its roots in the case of Goldman Sachs sending the Feds after Sergey Aleynikov (as we described in Chapter 13). That case (until Aleynikov's conviction was dismissed and vacated) gave people who were suspicious about how anyone could make money in 2008 an aha moment. In their statements about the sensitivity of the code that was alleged to have been stolen, the indubitable Goldman claimed that "there is a danger that somebody who knew how to use this program could use it to manipulate markets in unfair ways."4 We will address both claims here.

#### Front-Running

Let's be really explicit: Front‐running occurs when a fiduciary uses knowledge of his customer's order to buy or sell to perform that same action before the customer has the opportunity to do so. But HFTs aren't looking at customer orders and then deciding whether to front‐run them. They are forecasting into the extremely near‐term future, and sometimes they are speculating about what other traders might do next. As we pointed out in the section entitled "Does HFT Create Unfair Competition?," timing is everything for all kinds of alpha‐driven investors, and much of the exercise in timing relates to anticipating what others might do later. But most HFTs are not getting information about customer orders before they go out to the market. Mostly, they are responding to such orders, but that's what most traders have always done, with or without computers.

Some HFTs (arbitrageurs and HFT alpha traders) are reacting to fleeting inefficiencies caused by others' orders to reap profits. Noncontractual market makers (NCMMs) react to the limit order book and other information to place passive orders. They have no knowledge of the trades that others plan to make, and they do not see orders before those orders hit the market. Contractual market makers (CMMs) actually do see customer order flow and have requirements to provide liquidity on that order flow. Ironically, it is here where front‐running is actually theoretically possible, in contrast to the other scenarios just mentioned. However, it is rare that a CMM is the subject of the public's ire against HFTs. In fact, some critics want all HFTs to become CMMs, with obligations like those CMMs have. This would have the perverse consequence of giving all HFTs a look at order flow before it hits the tape.

A pet phrase of HFT's detractors is *latency arbitrage*, which is a stylized strategy that is supposed to demonstrate how an HFT can utilize a predatory algorithm to front‐run an institutional trader's execution algorithm. It is a story that begins with a premise that an HFT can see a customer order before it hits the tape, and then walks through how this information would be used to front‐run an order. It is further claimed that this kind of predatory practice generates \$1.5 to \$3 billion in profits annually for HFTs in the U.S. equity market alone.

It is true that, if an HFT could actually see the order before it hits the tape, it would be able to front‐run a customer order. If we grant the premise, the rest of the argument is trivial and follows directly. However, the premise is completely false.

The scenario imagined is that, when this order is placed, it takes some time to be reflected in the national best bid‐offer (NBBO), due to the latency we have described already in updating this centralized data feed. As we have also pointed out, to combat this latency, many HFTs establish direct data feeds from the exchanges. Thus, it is true that they can see the customer's order before it is reflected in the centralized tape. However—and this is the central flaw in the claim being addressed—the customer's order has to already be in the queue at a given exchange for an HFT with a direct data feed to see it.

There is no conceivable way that an HFT could see the order before it happens. It is true that, relative to someone relying on the consolidated tape, the HFT will be able to be better aware of the actual current order book. And there are clearly advantages to having timely information, or else it would be stupid for an HFT to bother establishing expensive and hard‐to‐manage direct feeds. But this advantage comes at a cost, and it is a cost any participant is welcome to bear for himself to compete. If a trader's strategy requires feeds to be as timely as an HFT, then it is probable he will go through all the trouble. If not, then he will not. But this is no different from establishing any other kind of competitive advantage in any industry (see "Does HFT Create Unfair Competition?").

It seems to me that HFT's opponents have misunderstood the difference between being faster than others and front‐running them. Front‐running is illegal, and it basically doesn't occur insofar as HFT is concerned. HFTs are, however, faster than most other market participants. Usain Bolt is faster than most other sprinters. He wins medals, and we marvel at his speed. We are not surprised that a marathoner cannot run 100 meters as quickly as Bolt, and we do not attempt to compare the "fastest man in the world" with the "fastest marathoner in the world." This is because it would be strange to do so: They are competing in different games. Bolt is not trying to outrun Patrick Makau (record‐holder for fastest marathon). Just so, HFTs are not trying to front‐run pension investors (nor could they, given the basic fact that the pension fund's orders go directly to the market). They are competing in different games.

Imagine a world in which there are no computerized trading strategies, no execution algorithms. In such a world, some traders would still have the ability to access and process information faster and more accurately than others. And those traders would outwit the less capable and make a profit doing so. This is completely normal and acceptable. And the analogy is identical in the case of HFTs. They do not have access to customer order flow before the fact. They can find out what the customer flow was as soon as possible after the fact, and they can attempt to react very quickly to that information. This, too, is completely normal and totally acceptable.

#### Manipulation and Cancellation Rates

Focusing now on manipulation, some have claimed that HFTs manipulate markets, either by moving prices or as a result of their high order cancellation rates. The troubled Facebook IPO in 2012 has been used as an example of this supposed manipulation by some observers. As it turns out, the problems at the opening of Facebook's IPO were specifically driven by technology problems at Nasdaq. What this has to do with HFTs is not something I have the ability to imagine. It also appears lost on those pointing to the Facebook IPO as evidence of an HFT manipulation problem that the price dropped and remained well below the IPO price at least up until the time of this writing (five months to the day after the IPO date, FB is approximately 50 percent below its IPO price).

But let's imagine that some bad actor in the HFT world does decide to manipulate markets or engage in quote stuffing. Should someone using a powerful tool for illegal purposes bring judgment on himself or on the tool he used? Should speculative trading be banned because the Hunt brothers cornered and manipulated the silver markets beginning in the 1970s (without the use of any technology more sophisticated than a telephone)? For that matter, should telephones be banned, since they can and have been used for evil purposes?

But we need not grant that HFTs engage in manipulative practices. Manipulation usually requires a trader to acquire a large enough inventory of a position to move the market. But considering our definition of an HFT, this is not in line with an HFT's requirement to get out of positions by the end of the day. Inventory, as we've seen, is generally not desirable to an HFT. So there is a logical inconsistency between the contention that HFTs manipulate markets and the fact that they dislike holding positions. The reality is that anyone with sufficient means and motivation can attempt to manipulate markets.

Critics have also pointed to the frequency with which HFTs cancel their orders (known as cancellation rates) as a way to manipulate markets at a micro level. A high rate of entering and cancelling orders is referred to as *quote stuffing*. Opponents of HFT claim that there are two problems with high cancellation rates: first, that high cancellation rates imply that the liquidity that we think we see is either not there at all or it is of inferior quality; second, that HFTs manipulate markets by overwhelming exchanges with massive message volumes due to placing and canceling too many orders. There are a number of problems with these arguments, but first, let's understand why cancellation rates are and *should be* high, if the market is functioning correctly.

We demonstrated in Chapter 14 the importance of queue placement in placing and canceling passive orders. Time priority markets (such as the U.S. equity markets) require that a passive trader be fast on his feet if he doesn't want to get picked off. Since much of the HFT world is passive, there is a great deal of competition to provide liquidity to active traders. This competition is good for the active trader, because it means that her trade will get done at a good price. Every time the price changes in a market, every time there is a trade, this is new information that must be accounted for by the market maker. This usually means canceling a previously resting passive order and placing a new one. Decimalization of stocks led to an increased frequency of price changes, and this has in turn meant a permanently higher rate of cancellations.

Fragmentation in the U.S. equity market is another important contributor. Because there are over a dozen official exchanges under Reg NMS, and because the formation of the NBBO is so slow (as described in Chapter 14), many HFTs post orders directly to each exchange. But they are posting far more liquidity than they actually want to provide, and once they get filled on the size they are willing to trade, they must cancel the extra orders or risk being run over by active traders. This is some of the basic risk management that we described in Chapter 15, and it is a good thing that HFTs are careful about managing risk.

Finally, many new orders reach the market too late to be at or near the front of the queue. In these cases, allowing those orders to remain in the order book is very risky for market makers, for all the reasons we described in Chapter 14. As such, seeing that an order arrived too late is sufficiently good reason to cancel it.

Opponents of HFT claim that the liquidity being provided is merely a mirage, or if it is real, it is inferior. Unfortunately, there is no evidence to support these claims. But the facts are what they are: The average NBBO quote on SPY, which is the highest volume stock in the world, had an average duration of over three seconds in the first half of 2010.4 A typical stock has lower volumes and longer NBBO quote durations. These numbers are not different from what opponents claim to have been true in the pre‐HFT days of 2004.5

HFT's opponents also contend that high message rates (which occur when there is a high volume of orders and cancellations) cause delays for exchanges, which buys the HFT time (to do what, I'm not sure). It is true that, when message volumes spike, exchanges must deal with the same microbursting problem (Chapter 14) as HFTs have to solve, and at the extremes, the exchanges do see delays. But slowing down message traffic would serve no economic purpose for an HFT. Indeed, during the Flash Crash, many HFTs who stopped trading did so specifically because data latencies were getting to such a level that they felt their data quality had deteriorated so much that they couldn't responsibly continue trading. Data latency is an enemy to an HFT, not a friend.

Furthermore, if exchanges were being hampered by HFTs, it is easy enough for them to do something about it. Indeed, exchanges do monitor the message traffic from each participant that connects to them, and they warn, sanction, and if necessary ban traders who generate excess traffic. This is a completely rational and acceptable way to handle the situation, because not all exchanges have the same capacity to handle messages. An artificial message limit would be too low for some and too high for others, and would add an arbitrary element to the healthy competition among exchanges.

A minimum resting time, which would disallow the immediate cancellation of an order, has also been suggested. The proximate effect of such a change would be that a large proportion of all orders would be very stale, and that such stale orders would offer new and very fruitful arbitrage opportunities to HFTs. For example, imagine that the NBBO on the SPY shows 1,000 shares bid at \$144.20 and 1,000 shares offered at \$144.21, and if these are freshly made orders that must rest for some time. Now imagine that the S&P futures move rapidly downward just at that time. The trader whose 1,000 share bid at \$144.20 is stuck because of a minimum resting time would see it get filled happily by an active order from an index arbitrageur, who would subsequently be able, quite possibly, to immediately buy back the short position at a lower price. Remember, based on what we showed in Chapter 14, the main reason a passive order would get canceled is to avoid being picked off. Requiring that a liquidity-providing passive trader allow himself to be picked off, in order to solve a nonexistent problem, doesn't seem likely to be an effective improvement to the current market structure.

As a final note, an academic paper published in September 2012 took the first-ever detailed, empirical look at the impact of HFTs on market manipulation.6 The authors analyzed 22 stock exchanges around the world from January 2003 through June 2011. Their findings:

*Controlling for country, market, legal and other differences across exchanges and over time, and using a variety of robustness checks including difference‐in‐differences tests, we show that* the presence of high frequency trading in some markets has significantly mitigated the frequency and severity of end‐of‐day manipulation, counter to recent concerns expressed in the media*. The effect of HFT is more pronounced than the role of trading rules, surveillance, enforcement and legal conditions in curtailing the frequency and severity of end‐ of‐day manipulation. We show our findings are robust to different measures of end‐of‐day manipulation, including but not limited to option expiry dates, among other things.*

## Does HFT Lead to Greater Volatility or Structural Instability?

Occasionally, computer software has glitches. When one of those glitches leads to millions of erroneous orders, causing huge instability in market prices, people feel that they should be worried. Furthermore, even without the presence of bugs in someone's code, events like the Flash Crash of 2010 lead to speculation that HFTs are to blame for extreme market volatility. Indeed, it remains fairly widely asserted that the Flash Crash was a computer‐driven event, despite both an abundance of evidence to the contrary and none in favor of such a theory. Even an SEC report on the event, which exonerated HFTs about as clearly as could be done by a government report, made no dent in the perception that HFTs were to blame.

Aside from the Flash Crash, other events have not helped the public relations efforts for HFT. For example, an HFT firm named Infinium was probed in August 2010 for a bug in its HFT programs that led to a \$1 increase in the price of crude oil in about one second. So are HFTs responsible for instability and volatility?

As was the case with the arguments already discussed, HFTs are accused of things that are equally or more applicable to other forms of trading. For every HFT problem or computer hiccup, there is a Mizuho securities trader who accidentally sold 600,000 shares of a stock at 1 yen each, instead of 1 share at 600,000 yen. Not to pick on the Japanese, but another fat finger error only a few months later had another trader buy 2,000 shares of a stock that traded at 510,000 yen, instead of 2 shares, costing his firm \$10 million in losses. An entertaining article in the *Financial News*, a Dow Jones publication, from March 20077 listed 10 human‐driven trading errors of breathtaking scope, including one for more than \$100 billion worth of stock in a European pharmaceutical; another involving a trader whose elbow touched an Instant Sell key on his keyboard, leading to a massive futures order in French government bonds; another order where a trader carelessly attempted to transact more than £8.1 billion worth of shares (nearly four times the company's market capitalization); and another where someone wrongly entered the 6‐digit SEDOL identifier for a stock in the *size* field of an order, leading to a £60 million loss; and so on.

Whether HFTs cause volatility even in the absence of glitches is a different question, which we will address empirically. However, this question is worth putting in context. It is clearly a matter of real concern if investors are systematically overpaying for their transactions. Such overpayment could certainly occur if an investor transacts due to heightened short-term volatility. And if HFTs are a driver of heightened short-term volatility, then there is both a fair and a very real concern to be addressed. But common sense gives us the same answer as a thorough empirical analysis.

We have had, and we continue to have, serious economic and geopolitical problems weighing on the markets. The 1929 market crash that kicked off the Great Depression, the spike in inflation and bond yields that crushed most assets in the 1970s, the decades‐long stagnation in Japan's economy and capital markets, the 1998 LTCM/Russian‐driven crash, the dot‐com bubble and the subsequent 50 percent decline in stocks that took years to recover, the financial debacle of 2008 (from which we still haven't fully recovered), and the problems in Greek and other Eurozone sovereigns are all by orders of magnitude more significant drivers of volatility than HFT will likely ever be. Neither computers nor HFTs play any role in these real economic issues, which seem to be the kinds of things with which real money investors are (and should be) primarily concerned.

#### An Empirical Analysis of HFTs and Volatility

Empirical analysis supports the claim that HFTs are not responsible for volatility. Critics point out that volatility in the S&P 500 has climbed since HFTs have gained prominence. A September 2011 article in the *New York Times* was titled "Market Swings Are Becoming New Standard."8 It argues that the stock market is more likely to "make large swings—on the order of 3 percent or 4 percent—than it has been any other time in recent stock market history." It goes on to list HFT as one of the probable causes. In an article for the High Frequency Traders website, Manoj Narang dissects this argument and provides an empirical study of the sources of volatility.9 Let's update and build on that analysis here.

The S&P 500 goes through two distinct phases in any given 24‐hour period. The first is the period during which the market is open. We can measure the behavior of the S&P while it's open by comparing the opening price and a closing price. The second period is when the market is closed. To understand the behavior of the market during this period, we can look at one day's closing price and the next day's opening price. These two mutually exclusive segments (open:close and close:open) add up to the behavior of the index from one day's close to the next day's close.

HFTs are active during the trading day. They are almost all dormant overnight (remember, they tend to take home no overnight positions). Much of the news that impacts markets comes out overnight (though some, for example, the Federal Open Market Committee's announcements, are intraday phenomena). As such, we can take as a rule of thumb that overnight (close:open) volatility is unrelated to HFTs, while intraday volatility could be related to HFTs (or other news and events that occur intraday). One of the errors that the aforementioned *New York Times* article makes is to point out that close‐to‐close volatility has gone up since HFTs have gained prominence. But we can do a better job of understanding the sources of this increase by examining the behavior of the market while it is closed, versus when HFTs are active (while the market is open).

For this analysis, we look at four quantities and compare them during two distinct periods. The first quantity is the absolute value of the percent change in the S&P from one day's close to the next (close:close). The second quantity is the absolute value of the percent change in the S&P from the open to the close of a single day (open:close). The third compares the absolute value of the percent change in the S&P from one day's close to the next day's open (close:open). The final quantity is the absolute value of the percent change from the intraday high to the intraday low for a single day. We took data from January 1, 2000, through September 2012, and drew a dividing line at January 1, 2007. This is because Reg NMS was enacted during 2007, which changed market structure to what it is today. Furthermore, the post‐2007 period is clearly when HFTs became most active. If the critics are right, we should see the open:close volatility increase at least as much as the close:close volatility, since that's the only time that HFTs could possibly affect prices.

Comparing the close:close results, we find that the S&P 500 (as measured using the SPY ETF) averaged 0.84 percent changes from 2000 to 2006, and 1.03 percent changes from 2007 to 2012. This is a 23 percent increase in the magnitude of the index's movements, and is the primary evidence used to support the contention that HFTs have caused increased volatility. However, if we divide the data into the natural partitions we described (close:open and open:close), we see a different picture. This is shown in Exhibit 16.1.

What is clear from this table is that, while volatility (measured in this way) has increased overall from 2007 onward, the increase is actually much smaller intraday than it is overnight. The increase in the average of the gap from high to low within a day is also much smaller than the increase

|                           | 2000–2006 | 2007–2012 | %<br>Difference |
|---------------------------|-----------|-----------|-----------------|
| close:close               | 0.84%     | 1.03%     | +23%            |
| open:close<br>(intraday)  | 0.76%     | 0.82%     | +8%             |
| close:open<br>(overnight) | 0.37%     | 0.59%     | +59%            |
| high:low                  | 1.47%     | 1.72%     | +17%            |

Exhibit 16.1 Average Price Movement in SPY

in overnight volatility. These data clearly indicate that market volatility has increased for reasons that have nothing to do with HFTs.

Examining the median movements of the S&P instead of the averages shows an even more stark contrast, as shown in Exhibit 16.2. Here, we see that volatility has actually not increased all that much, and that intraday volatility has actually *contracted* somewhat since the rise of HFTs! By contrast, and consistent with what we saw from the analysis of average movements, overnight volatility has spiked according to this measure as well.

We can also examine whether larger moves have become more frequent. To answer this question, we looked at the frequency of moves of 3 percent or greater in the same way, as shown in Exhibit 16.3. Here, we see an increase in volatility measured in each way, but the pattern of increases in overnight volatility far outstripping intraday volatility holds.

It becomes more interesting as we examine even larger moves. What we see is that, when counting the frequency of larger moves (4 percent or more), the instances have become more common in the intraday period than from close to close, while the high versus low volatility increase continues to lag. This is shown in Exhibit 16.4.

At these more extreme levels, it appears that overnight volatility plays less of a role than intraday volatility in explaining the increase in the frequency of very large moves since 2007. However, even here, the picture is mixed. First, while the intraday volatility increases more as the magnitude of the move goes up, we see that the high versus low volatility increases at a slower pace overall. Second, as we begin to examine these outlier events,

|                           | 2000–2006 | 2007–2012 | %<br>Difference |
|---------------------------|-----------|-----------|-----------------|
| close:close               | 0.62%     | 0.67%     | +8%             |
| open:close<br>(intraday)  | 0.55%     | 0.53%     | –3%             |
| close:open<br>(overnight) | 0.26%     | 0.39%     | +51%            |
| high:low                  | 1.26%     | 1.33%     | +5%             |

Exhibit 16.2 Median Price Movement in SPY

|                           | 2000–2006 | 2007–2012 | %<br>Difference |  |
|---------------------------|-----------|-----------|-----------------|--|
| close:close               | 2.56%     | 5.87%     | +129%           |  |
| open:close<br>(intraday)  | 1.53%     | 2.69%     | +75%            |  |
| close:open<br>(overnight) | 0.11%     | 0.83%     | +629%           |  |
| high:low                  | 6.20%     | 10.91%    | +76%            |  |

Exhibit 16.3 Frequency of 3% or Greater Moves in SPY

we are dealing with events that happen very infrequently. For example, out of the 1,448 trading days since January 1, 2007, we have seen only 20 instances where intraday moves were at least 4 percent. As such, it would be unwise to draw any serious conclusions from these data.

However, one could contend that HFTs' association with market volatility is as follows: Most of the time their activities coincide with lower volatility, but in the most extreme cases, their activities coincide with higher volatility. Even if we make a grave statistical error and mistake coincidence for causation, the most damning argument against HFTs could be that, in the 20 instances where the market moved at least 4 percent in an intraday period over the last five and a half years, HFTs may have contributed to those large moves to some unknowable degree. Other investors surely will also bear some of the blame. But for the other 1,428 days, HFTs reduced volatility.

One major reason that the data support the claim that HFTs reduce volatility is that a strategy that buys and sells roughly the same amount during a fixed time period cannot cause any net price impact on the instrument being traded. Whatever price impact was generated on the buying of a position is realized in the opposite direction when selling it. And without impact, the probability that volatility, even measured on the slowest timescale attributable to HFTs (one day), is related to HFTs is effectively nil. The definition of HFTs logically precludes one from drawing such a conclusion.

|                           | 2000–2006 | 2007–2012 | %<br>Difference |
|---------------------------|-----------|-----------|-----------------|
| close:close               | 0.68%     | 2.97%     | +335%           |
| open:close<br>(intraday)  | 0.28%     | 1.38%     | +386%           |
| close:open<br>(overnight) | 0.11%     | 0.48%     | +325%           |
| high:low                  | 1.65%     | 5.73%     | +248%           |

Exhibit 16.4 Frequency of 4% or Greater Moves in the SPY

Furthermore, it is a basic fact of capital markets that posting limit orders, which is a huge part of the activity of HFTs, does not cause volatility, but rather reduces it. Every single order in the order book represents a friction that must be overcome before the market can move through the price levels presented in the order book. Illiquidity breeds volatility, not an abundance of liquidity. This fact seems lost on HFT's opponents. Even in times of duress, when HFTs must trade actively, it is most often to liquidate positions that were acquired passively. This implies that even in stress scenarios, such as the one we will cover in depth next, HFTs are probably no worse than neutral to liquidity. In aggregate, it is extremely clear that they are liquidity providers.

#### The Flash Crash

It took less than 20 minutes for many blue‐chip shares to drop by about 5 percent. In smaller capitalization companies, the moves were worse. Brunswick Corp fell 9.3 percent in 12 minutes (more than 22 percent from its opening price). There was massive volume, enough to cause the NYSE to take almost two and a half hours after the market close to finish reporting floor transactions. Market makers were found to have exacerbated the downdraft by turning from buyers to sellers. There was chaos in the prices of some executions relative to what they should probably have been, given the prevailing market. There was widespread disgust and disappointment in the integrity of capital markets, and many brokerage firms saw reduced volumes and earnings in the wake of this event. These events occurred on May 29, 1962.10 But they hold some important parallels and equally important lessons in considering the Flash Crash of 2010. The reality is that, just as real, deep crises occur in markets without any help from computers or HFTs, so do rapid fluctuations in prices.

The causes of the 2010 Flash Crash are several. First, and most importantly, the markets were already jittery from a brewing sovereign debt crisis in Europe and a very tentative economic recovery in the United States. The stock market was already down several percentage points for the day before the first spike down around 2:40 p.m. The role of negative short‐term sentiment on the part of a wide array of market participants should not be discounted. It was the single largest cause of the Flash Crashes of both 1962 and 2010.

Second, Waddell & Reed, an established mutual fund manager, entered a large (somewhat inelegant, and fully discretionary) order to sell S&P futures.11 The face value of this order was approximately \$4.1 billion, and at a time when the market was already down, this order exacerbated price movements enough to trigger further selling, for example from stop‐losses and other kinds of stop‐orders. The order was entered around 2:30 p.m. on May 6, 2010, and at that point, the S&P 500 was already down 2.5 percent for the day. There is little doubt that this 75,000 contract order, which took 20 minutes to execute, was a driver of the volatility that ensued. In particular, their trading algorithm was designed to ignore price movements and merely focus on volume levels as the determinant of the size of each order placed. But since their own order was causing others to panic, volumes increased, and their 75,000 contract order became the center of a snowball. It is important to point out that there is no judgment assigned to these facts. Waddell's order was perfectly legitimate, with no evil intent behind it. It was their right to enter it, and what transpired afterward has no bearing on that fact.

Third, the interconnectedness of instruments across various exchanges and instrument classes (e.g., S&P futures to S&P exchange‐traded funds [ETFs] to the constituents of these ETFs, to the names that are peers of those constituents) in U.S. equities had a role in the propagation of these volatile moves across the marketplace. As we described in talking about index arbitrage in Chapter 15, the prices of structurally correlated instruments will tend to move together. So, when S&P futures fell, the ETFs that track the same index moved in lockstep. So did the stocks that are constituents of the S&P 500 (and the ETFs that contain those). Then, statistical correlations dictated that other, similar stocks should follow suit. There is little judgment on this fact, either. It is generally a good thing to have many ways to express an investment idea. Each structure offers some benefits and some drawbacks, and that they tend to move lockstep with one another does not mean that there is some problem that needs to be solved.

Fourth, the fragmentation of the U.S. equity market played a role. The fragmentation itself was a procustomer change in market structure that really picked up steam in the late 1990s with the propagation of electronic communication networks (ECNs). The increased competition with the previously monopolistic stock exchanges drove costs lower and liquidity higher. But in this case, fragmentation did have a hand in the breakdown in liquidity due to the declaration of Self Help. Reg NMS allows an exchange to cease participating and sharing information with the other market centers if there is a problem with one or more of them. The NYSE Arca exchange, for example, was alleged to have had problems with its technology, resulting from the huge increase in message traffic. (Remember our discussion about microbursts in Chapter 14? This is why they matter!) Several exchanges pointed to what they viewed as Arca's problems and declared Self Help, which they are allowed to do if they find that some member of the market system is having problems. This exacerbated the fragmentation problem and reduced liquidity. It was a contributor to the *stub quotes* issue that led to some shares being executed at obviously ridiculous prices.

Finally, the Flash Crash was exacerbated by the extremely reasonable decision by some (not nearly all) HFT speculators to cease trading. They are not required to make markets, and data latency times coming out of exchanges were severe. At a time when the market was clearly broken in several places, there is no judgment that should be cast against any trader who simply wants no part of some craziness in the markets. Note that, nevertheless, volumes during the flash crash were spectacularly high, so either non‐HFT traders were doing many multiples of their normal order size, or else HFT traders weren't as absent as is widely believed.

In sum, HFTs were not responsible for the Flash Crash, nor are they responsible for the very real economic problems we face currently. Can HFT cause market problems through glitches or misbehavior? Absolutely. But so can a lot of other things that aren't HFTs. No one is talking about banning human traders because they often screw up spectacularly once in a while. Why should we have a double standard on computerized traders? Regulation is useful here, and there should always be repercussions for costly and careless errors. The first and most appropriate repercussion is that people who make dumb trades tend to lose money for themselves (e.g., Knight Capital). They have their investors to face, as well. But that sort of natural punishment, coupled with any required ex post enforcement, seems perfectly legitimate given the total lack of other valid options.

## Does HFT Lack Social Value?

This is perhaps the most disappointing argument I've heard against HFT. Actually its being infuriating has nothing to do with HFT at all. It is problematic in the philosophical outlook it implies, and disappointing in the writers who have furthered its acceptance by many. Paul Krugman, a brilliant Nobel‐laureate economist, actually made the argument in an op‐ed piece in the *New York Times* that HFT is generally a game of "bad actors," and that it's "hard to see how traders who place their orders one‐thirtieth of a second faster than anyone else do anything to improve that social function."12 Allow me to state this explicitly. This is a catastrophically bad point of view, most especially for a self‐described liberal economist.

I don't care about the fact, and it is a clear and indisputable fact despite all the rhetoric to the contrary, that HFTs actually provide an enormous amount of liquidity to the marketplace, which facilitates the trading activities of a great number of other types of players that are judged as having social value by those interested in casting such judgments. It's irrelevant. The problem is far deeper with this argument.

The first question that is begged when someone raises the banner of social value is this: Who gets to decide what has social value and what doesn't? What is the minimum holding period for an investor to be judged favorably as improving the social function of markets? Where do we stop with this analysis of social value? What about short‐sellers, who were indeed questioned and blamed heavily for the failures of Bear Stearns, AIG, and others in 2008? What about the makers of Bubble‐Yum, Snickers bars, Coca‐Cola, cigarettes, guns, fighter jets, and nuclear weapons? It seems like kind of a fascist line of thinking to raise the question of social value. What's the social value of an economist? What's the social value of a tobacco company or a gun manufacturer? Who gets to decide? It's a free country, so people can say and do what they want, so long as they do not impinge on the rights of others. And this type of thinking leads directly to the impingement of others' pursuits via its fallacious presumptions.

## Regulatory Considerations

It's true that computers are powerful tools, and that the more powerful a tool is, the greater amount of damage (or good) that it can do. But while that calls for scrutiny and sensible regulation, it does not call for the banning of the use of powerful tools.

Despite the hot‐headed talk from some outmoded corners of the marketplace, U.S. regulators have been surprisingly even‐headed and downright thoughtful about all this. So far, every real step they've taken with regard to HFT has actually seemed pretty fair. Banning naked access was a reasonable thing to do. The SEC's report on the Flash Crash was even‐keeled, pretty accurate, and placed the responsibility (not the blame, which is something needed when there's a real disaster) more or less in the right camps.

One of the most controversial measures being considered in the United States is a financial transaction tax (FTT). It is also one of the most stupid ideas regarding HFT and potential improvements to market structure. If the tax is not universal and global, then trading will simply move to markets where taxes are lower or are not applied at all. If taxes are universal and global, and if HFT becomes unprofitable as a result, volumes are likely to plummet, which reduces both the amount collected by the FTT and follow‐ on impacts to capital gains taxes. Declining volumes will also damage banks and brokerage firms severely, and it is probable that their least risky and most profitable units will be the hardest hit. Banks' prime brokerage units are nearly riskless operations that generate large revenues from customers' commissions. If customers are trading less, banks will make less. This probably implies a substantial loss in jobs, not just at the banks, but also at various trading entities associated with the markets.

None of this has stopped 11 countries in the EU from adopting an FTT, but it will not be surprising if they follow the path Sweden has already been down. In 1984, Sweden enacted an FTT. Trading volumes across various asset classes in Sweden fell dramatically. Futures volumes were off 98 percent, bond volumes dropped 80 percent, and the options market in Sweden disappeared entirely. By 1990, Sweden's equity markets lost more than half of their volumes to London's exchanges. The fees collected were just over 3 percent of what the Swedish Finance Ministry had forecasted, and the FTT actually cost the Swedish Treasury revenue in aggregate, because other taxable revenues on capital gains fell, more than offsetting the minuscule revenues that were achieved. It was repealed in 1991.13 Needless to say, Sweden did not join the 11 countries that adopted the FTT in October 2012.

The irony is that the tax is designed to "make the financial firms that got us into this mess pay their share for the recovery." But customers of financial firms (e.g., hedge funds and HFTs) certainly did not cause lax mortgage lending practices, CDOs, bogus AAA ratings, and so on. And it is customers of financial firms, not the financial firms, who will be paying this tax. It's one thing if it's just HFTs and hedge funds paying the tax. Maybe most people wouldn't care. But the Dutch Central Bank (DCB) "opposes the introduction of a European financial transaction tax that it estimated would cost the nation's lenders, pension funds and insurers about €4 billion and hurt economic growth." The DCB concluded that more than 40 percent of the annual cost of an FTT in the Netherlands would be borne by pensions (€1.7 billion).14

I don't care much about the bluster in the press. I've been involved in hedge funds for over 16 years now, and when I got started, few knew what a hedge fund even was. When they did, it was in the form of vilification (Soros for attacking Asian currencies, LTCM for nearly destroying the financial markets, and so on). We get paid pretty well, and if not being liked by someone who trusts what he reads in the news to be the whole story is the cost of that compensation, I'll take that trade every day. I only hope that those with the power to actually make changes continue to take constructive steps, rather than heeding the biased and/or uninformed voices of a very loud minority with regard to HFT. And certainly, we should be very, very wary of the unintended consequences of taking bad advice from ignorant, shortsighted, or biased people.

Some reasonable ideas to improve market structure do exist. Circuit breakers, which have long been proposed (and used, in markets like futures) are an effective way to cool down overheated markets. Ending the ban on locked markets would go a very long way toward eliminating one of the most severe inefficiencies in the U.S. equity market, which would further eliminate the need for ISO orders (which are, for all practical purposes, unavailable to most investors, since the broker must determine that the investor is capable of complying with Reg NMS, which most investors cannot do). Liquidity provision rebates are currently tiered, so that the most active participants get the best rebate tiers. While rebates themselves are a good thing (as they make it worthwhile to accept the risk of providing liquidity), tiered rebates make it impossible for lower‐volume customers to profitably post passive orders. Moving toward a much flatter (or entirely flat) rebate structure would solve this problem. And, finally, it behooves regulators to begin to arm themselves with technology that will enable them to properly monitor and police the markets. This appears to be well understood by now, and we are beginning to see the SEC take significant steps in the right direction.

## Summary

In general, and let me say this clearly, HFTs are not run by evil people. They stay well within both the rules of the markets and the boundaries of common ethics and good sense. They often self‐report any irregularities caused by their trading to the authorities. That the powerful computers and fast communication lines they possess might be used to manipulate the market doesn't mean that legitimate activities undertaken with these tools must be stopped. Just as people are prosecuted for calling in fake bomb threats, so should people be prosecuted for manipulation, front‐running, and other bad behaviors in the markets. But there has been no evidence that computerized traders are especially guilty of such activities, and there is certainly no logic to a call to ban their activities because of a few examples of corruption.

Let us remember that some people have to be told what's right and wrong, and they have to be punished for ignoring the rules. We Americans had to be told it was wrong to hold slaves, and wrong to force our children to work as coal miners and chimney sweeps, and so on. That doesn't make farming or all farmers bad. It doesn't make families or all parents bad. It unfortunately makes regulations and their proper enforcement absolutely required, because otherwise some people will go too far. Even with good regulations and enforcement, this still happens. But there's no cure for the vices of humanity.

HFT isn't evil any more than walking your dog is evil. Nor should it be banned any more than walking one's dog should be banned. Yes, some dog owners will let their dog crap on your lawn and simply walk away, leaving the souvenir behind. That doesn't make dogs bad; it makes the dog's owner sort of antisocial, and well‐deserving of some punishment. Computers, even when used for trading, are programmed by people. If those people are malicious or careless, they will hurt others, and they should be prosecuted.

But people have been hurting others through malice and carelessness for far longer than we've had computers, ECNs, or dark fiber. To take the attention off of the humans that engage in the activities that are harmful, and to focus on the instrument they use to cause harm, is folly. Furthermore, nearly every single serious academic study undertaken has either demonstrated that HFTs have empirically added liquidity and improved price discovery, or demonstrated that there is no evidence to support the idea that HFTs have created additional volatility or decreased market efficiency. The most critical papers often remark that problems can arise from HFT, but they are quick to note that such problems have arisen before HFT, and continue to arise due to other factors since the advent of HFT. An excellent and recent summary, which is also full of further references, can be found at the Foresight Project, which was conducted by the UK Government Office for Science, using leading academics from 20 countries.15

## [Notes](http://www.nytimes.com)

- 1. [Charles Duhigg, "Stock Traders Find Speed Pays, in Milliseconds](http://topics.nytimes.com/topics/reference/timestopics/subjects/h/high_frequen-cy_algorithmic_trading/index.html)," www [.nytimes.com, July 23, 2009](http://topics.nytimes.com/topics/reference/timestopics/subjects/h/high_frequen-cy_algorithmic_trading/index.html).
- 2. http://sec.gov/litigation/admin/2012/34‐67857.pdf.
- 3. http://topics.nytimes.com/topics/reference/timestopics/subjects/h/high\_frequency\_algorithmic\_trading/index.html, September 26, 2012. This article starts by conflating high speed and high frequency trading. It is a case study in confusing cause and effect, in confusing anything to do with computers with HFT, and with [creating a tempest in a teacup](http://www.institutionalinvestor.com) (e.g., Knight Capital's near collapse). It's a pretty shabby article, and I say this as someone who *likes* the *New York Times*.
- 4. Manoj Narang, "[What's All the Fuss Ab](http://www.bloomberg.com)out High‐Frequency Trading Cancellation Rates?," www.institutionalinvestor.com, June 24, 2010.
- 5. David Glovin and Christine Harper, "Goldman Trading‐Code Investment Put at Risk by Theft (Update3)," www.bloomberg.com, July 6, 2009.
- 6. Douglas Cumming, Feng Zhan, and Michael Aitken, "High Frequency Trading and [End‐of‐Day Manipulation](http://ftalphaville.ft.com)," available at SSRN 2145565September 12, 2012.
- 7. Stacy‐Marie Ishmael, "The Curse [of the Fat‐fingered T](http://www.nytimes.com)rader," FT Alphaville, March 16, 2007, http://ftalphaville.ft.com.
- 8. Louise Story [and Graham Bowley, "Market S](http://www.highfrequencytraders.com)wings Are Becoming New Standard," *New York Times*, September 11, 2011, www.nytimes.com.
- 9. Manoj Narang, "HFT Is NOT Responsible for Market Volatility—You Are!" September 15, 2011, www.highfrequencytraders.com.