The CIA puts the death rate at 12 deaths per 1,000 population and life expectancy at 55 years. The WHO puts the death rate at 8.6/1,000 population and life expectancy at birth of 60 for men and 64 for women (WHO, 2002). Burmese people aged 65 and older constitute approximately 5% of the population (CIA, 2002).

## **REFERENCES**

- Ba Thike, K. (1997). Abortion: A public health problem in Myanmar. *Reproductive Health Matters, 9*, 94–100.
- Central Intelligence Agency (2002). *CIA World Factbook: Burma*. Washington, DC: Central Intelligence Agency Government Publications.
- Hail, J. (1995). Burmese attack could doom independence struggle. Bangkok, Thailand: UPI.
- Henderson, J. W., Heimann, J. M., Martindale, K. W., Shinn, R. S., Weaver, J. O., & White, E. T. (1971). *Area handbook for Burma, foreign area studies*. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
- International Planned Parenthood Foundation (IPPF) (2002). *Country profile: Myanmar*. Available from http://www.ippf.org/regions/ countries/mmr/index.htm
- Khin Than Tin & Khin Saw Hla (1990). *Causes of maternal deaths in affiliated teaching hospitals*. Yangon: Myanmar Medical Association.
- Krasu, M. (1992). An Overview of Maternal Morbidity in Myanmar. *Proceedings of a Seminar on Maternal Morbidity Obstetric and Gynecological Section*. Yangon: Myanmar Medical Association.
- Leach, E. R. (1970). *Political systems of Highland Burma: A study of Kachin social structure*. London: Athlone Press.
- Ministry of Health (2002, May 20–26). *Ministry of Health Statistics*. Unpublished report cited by *Myanmar Times and Business Review, Health and Medicine Supplement, 6*(115).
- Ministry of Health and United Nations Population Fund (1999). *A reproductive health needs assessment in Myanmar*. Yangon: Author.

- *Myanmar Times and Business Review* (2002, May 20–26). *Health and Medicine Supplement, 6*(115).
- People's Tribunal on Food Scarcity and Militarization in Burma (The) (1999, October). *Voice of the hungry nation*. Asian Human Rights Commission.
- Sein Tu (2002, May 20–26). *New attitudes to mental health care. Myanmar Times and Business Review, Health and Medicine Supplement, 6*(115).
- Skidmore, M. (1998). *Flying through a skyful of lies: Survival strategies and the politics of fear in urban Burma (Myanmar) UMI*, NQ50073. Doctoral dissertation, McGill University.
- Skidmore, M. (2002a, June). Menstrual madness: Women's health and wellbeing in urban Burma (Myanmar). In A. Whittaker (Ed.), *Women and health* [Special ed.] *35*(4), 85–104.
- Skidmore, M. (2002b). "Behind bamboo fences": Domestic violence against women and children in urban Burma (Myanmar). In L. Manderson & L. Bennett (Eds.), *Women and violence in Asia* (Chap. 5, pp. 90–106): Curzon Press.
- Skidmore, M., & World Vision International (1997a). *A rapid assessment study of maternal and child health in Mandalay, Myanmar*. Yangon: World Vision.
- Skidmore, M., & World Vision International (1997b). *A rapid assessment study of maternal and child health in Hlaingthayar, Myanmar*. Yangon: World Vision International.
- Smith, M. (1996). *Fatal silence: Freedom of expression and the right to health in Burma*. London: Article 19.
- United Nations Drug Control Programme (UNDCP) (2001). *World drug report*. Available from http://www.undcp.org/world\_drug\_report.html
- United Nations International Children's Fund (UNICEF) (2000). *UNICEF Statistics*. Available from http://www.childinfo.org
- Women's Organizations from Burma and Women's Affairs Department, NCGUB (WOB and NCGUB) (2000). *Burma: The current state of women—conflict area specific*. An unpublished shadow report to the 22nd Session of CEDAW.
- World Health Organization (1997). *An assessment of the contraceptive mix in Myanmar*. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization.
- World Health Organization (2002). *Country health profile: Myanmar*. New Delhi, India: World Health Organization.

# **Cree**

#### **Naomi Adelson**

# **ALTERNATIVE NAMES**

*Eeyou* (singular); *Eeyouch* (plural); person, the people. The term Cree is only used when spoken in English and is not the term the people use for themselves.

## **LOCATION AND LINGUISTIC AFFILIATION**

The entire population of Cree in Canada spreads from the province of Alberta to the province of Quebec. Historically ranging from plains-dwellers to woodland

#### **Overview of the Culture 615**

and northern sub-Arctic hunters, the many Cree nations are the most widely distributed geographically of First Nations in Canada. All of the Cree dialects derive from the Algonquian language family. The eastern Cree of the James Bay region of Quebec, the population highlighted in this entry, speak Cree as their first language and English, French, or both after that (96% have Cree as their mother tongue, 90% speak it at home; 77% speak English, 29% speak French in addition to Cree, 20% speak neither French nor English [Schnarch, 2001]).

## **OVERVIEW OF THE CULTURE**

The James Bay Cree or *Eeyouch* of *Eeyou astchee* (the people's homeland) have been living in, traversing through, and sustained by the sub-Arctic region for over 5000 years. Historically, small family bands navigated vast territories of *Eeyou astchee* over the course of a year, hunting, fishing, trapping, and harvesting the plant and animal resources required for food, clothing, shelter, and tools. These hunting territories remain a salient aspect of the lives of the Cree today, as people continue to hunt and consume the game of the region and define themselves through the lands that their ancestors marked as theirs by usufructuary right and on which they still hunt, trap, and fish. Animals of the sub-Arctic such as caribou, hare, beaver, and porcupine, as well as the fish and the fowl of the region, such as Canada goose, duck, grouse, and ptarmigan, were the principal diet of this hunting population and remain important foods today. Summer fruits such as blueberries and cranberries supplemented the meat diet. With contact, and especially the fur trade, came what are now considered staples of traditional fare: flour for bannock (soda bread), tea, and sugar.

The land and its resources are intrinsic to the rich animistic traditions of the *Eeyouch* whereby, most significantly, a successful hunt is the result of a system of mutual respect between the hunter and the animal and its spirit force. Indeed, the culmination of that alliance between animal and human is when the animal chooses to give itself to the hunter (Feit, 1986; Tanner, 1979). With animate spirit imbued in each and every element of the land, the nutritional or healing properties of plants and animals are enhanced. Life and spirituality are inseparable, and both are linked in innumerable ways to the places of *Eeyou astchee*. Thus, *Eeyou astchee* is not only a physical resource, but the source of spiritual and cultural heritage. For example, in the Cree language, specific sites are identified as often by their topographical features as by a significant experience that occurred there, such as burials, where individuals were born or where a particular spirit resides.

Christian influences on the *Eeyouch* have been both significant and complex ever since the earliest days of Christian missionary activity on *Eeyou astchee* and deserve mention here. Indeed, organized religion continues to demarcate certain boundaries of affiliation and identity among the people. More specifically, the Anglican church introduced Christianity to the Cree region in the mid-19th century. The early missionaries denounced all that they deemed to be heathen practices (especially drumming and the shaking tent ceremony) and those early resolutions resonate to this day. On the one hand, for many, Christianity was an extension of their familiar practices of humility on the land, respect for all living things, and deep love and commitment to their families. Thus, many were readily able to meld traditional practices with this new Christian faith, although strategically chose to practice indigenous ceremonies well outside of the purview of the missionaries. On the other hand, others were—and remain—less inclined to practice anything that was originally forbidden by the church. In some communities, too, evangelical Christianity has a growing and loyal following and it, too, separates indigenous spiritual practice from the more common activities of hunting and trapping. Moreover, there is a surge of interest among many *Eeyouch* in traditional spiritual beliefs and practices and a resurgence of ceremonies once thought lost to the younger generations. Thus, the church, as a symbol of organized religion, remains a complex influence on people's lives as they negotiate their contemporary cultural identities as sometimes part of and sometimes counter to its influences and authority.

Now numbering over 13,000 the *Eeyouch* live in nine communities, many of which originated first as summer gathering places and then as trading post sites. These sites became official villages when the Canadian federal government took over the management of the aboriginal communities in the early part of the 20th century. The nine *Eeyou* communities include four inland (Nemaska, Mistissini, Oujé-Bougoumou, Waswanipi) and five coastal (Waskaganish, Chisasibi, Wemindji, Eastmain on James Bay, and Whapmagoostui on Hudson Bay) settlements. The communities range in population size from about 500 to over 3,000. This is a young and growing population, with only 4% of the total population 65 and over and approximately 34% of the *Eeyouch* under 15 years of age. As well, with a crude birth rate of approximately 24%, the current trend suggests that the population will double between 1999 and 2027 (Schnarch, 2001). The income security program, set up under the James Bay and Northern Quebec Agreement, provides a cash income to those individuals who choose to spend the greater part of the year living in the bush and actively trapping and hunting. Recent figures indicate that for all nine communities, 37% of the population is registered in this program. Other forms of employment are largely community based and are divided almost exclusively between local administration, Cree entities, and community enterprises (approximately 12% employed in each of these sectors). The unemployment rate for those 15 and over in *Eeyou astchee* is approximately 17% (compared with 10% in Canada) and among those employed, only 39% had full-time, year-round jobs in 1995. The average total income for the *Eeyouch* in their territory is less than half that of non-Aboriginals living in *Eeyou astchee* (approximately \$17,000 versus \$40,000) (Schnarch, 2001).

The *Eeyouch* are represented nationally by the Grand Council of the Crees (GCC) of Quebec, a legal corporation of the Cree nation created in 1974 (GCC, 1996). The GCC originally arose out of political necessity in the early 1970s. In 1971, the *Eeyouch* found themselves in a dire struggle for their lands. The Quebec provincial government, without consultation with the *Eeyouch*, was planning to divert vast waterways on *Eeyou astchee* in order to construct one of the world's largest hydro-electric projects. After a long, gruelling, and bitter legal battle with both governments and Hydro-Quebec, the *Eeyouch* finally—but reluctantly agreed to exchange the rights to over 600,000 km2 of land for specific benefits, payments, and land rights. This modern treaty, known as the James Bay and Northern Quebec Agreement (JBNQA), was signed between the *Eeyouch*, the Inuit of Quebec, and the federal and provincial governments. The Agreement provides the context for a form of (delegated) self-government, control of wildlife management, input into environmental impact assessments, an innovative program of guaranteed income for men and women who trap on a full-time basis, as well as administrative control over education, health, local justice, and local and regional governments. The Cree Regional Authority was created to act as the regional government responsible for the administration of the JBNQA. Programs and services provided to the communities are co-ordinated by the Cree Regional Authority with the collaboration of the Cree Housing Corporation, the Cree Regional Boards of Health and Social Services, and the Cree School Board. The now self-governing *Eeyouch* are an established nation due to a large extent to the success of the assertive and, at times, uncompromising leadership of GCC of Quebec. The GCC rightly boasts consultative status on the UN Economic and Social Council and has had tremendous impact internationally, nationally, and regionally as an efficient, well-organized, and active government (Marvelle, 2001).

It is important to remember that prior to 1975 and really until about the early 1980s, the *Eeyouch* were organized into "village band societies," administered locally but according to the dictates of the federal Indian Act; their homes were substandard as were the facilities and services available to them (Salisbury, 1986). The JBNQA brought not only administrative control to the people and income security for full-time trappers but also improved housing and facilities, a voice in the administration of the lands and resources of *Eeyou Astchee*, and control over education and health services. The JBNQA, in other words, was viewed as progressive at the time of the signing. It was, however, never fully implemented, leaving the *Eeyou* leadership engaged in endless legal wranglings with the provincial and federal governments for alleged breaches of the Agreement. In 2001, the new leadership of the GCC agreed to drop all the outstanding lawsuits. In what must be seen as a pragmatic plan to accommodate future generations of the burgeoning population of *Eeyou astchee*, the current leadership of the GCC not only put a moratorium on the legal battles but, more importantly, has agreed to allow further extensive hydro-electric development on *Eeyou astchee*. In exchange, the new Rupert–Eastmain Accord will—if it passes environmental review—see the Quebec government paying out a large cash settlement over the next 50 years to be used for community and business development, job creation, and resource management (Dougherty, 2001; Macpherson, 2001). The signing of this new Accord did not come without dissent from some members of the *Eeyou* communities. The current leadership is attempting to plan for the future, however, and that future must include some form of guaranteed employment for the growing number of young people who have fewer and fewer opportunities to sustain themselves through traditional hunting or trapping activities.

# **THE CONTEXT OF HEALTH: ENVIRONMENTAL, ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND POLITICAL FACTORS**

Beyond a simple dichotomy of health or ill-health, being healthy (*miyupimaatisiiun*) for the *Eeyouch* is the definitive

#### **Medical Practitioners 617**

expression of core cultural values. Being healthy has traditionally meant a balanced relationship between individuals and their social, spiritual, and natural worlds. In particular, it implies proper hunting practices and hence a respectful relationship between humans and the animals of the land: a successful hunt means healthy eating and appropriate social relations means that the hunted foods will be apportioned amongst oneself and one's kin. If, too, the hunted foods, the land, and the hunting traditions are all integral to *miyupimaatisiiun*, then the exploitation of the land would logically be the most profoundly felt impediment to being healthy for the *Eeyouch*. Thus each imposition upon the people and their lands—from the incursions of the earliest traders to internal colonization and present-day disputes to retain control over their territory—magnifies the meanings of *miyupimaatisiiun* as well as the direct and indirect impediments to health (Adelson, 2000).

The earliest days of contact brought an onslaught of infectious diseases to the indigenous peoples of the Americas. Diseases such as influenza, typhus, diphtheria, measles, smallpox, and whooping cough took a tremendous toll and wiped out generations directly, through death, or indirectly through the loss of hunting manpower or women's weakened ability to reproduce (Waldram, Herring, & Young, 1995). The more isolated Cree populations likely had comparatively fewer losses from these early infectious diseases because many simply were not in direct contact with the traders and other travelers to the region. As families began to live for longer periods of time near the trading posts, however, infectious diseases began to take a greater toll on the *Eeyou* population. Because of a decline in the fur-bearing animals vital to the trade economy, and subsequent real hunger, or job opportunities, or later to allow children access to the first elementary schools in the *Eeyou* north, by the early decades of the 20th century many more people were living in and around the trading post, swelling them into rudimentary villages. Living at the post, however, was no guarantee of health. Indeed, it was here that the second wave of infectious diseases, including influenza and tuberculosis, took their toll on this population. With large families living in small, inadequate housing facilities infectious diseases spread through these early settlements. Conditions had to reach an extreme before federally based health services were extended north to the people. In one *Eeyou* community, permanent health care personnel only arrived with the armed forces in the 1950s, as this one small, isolated post was an ideal site for the early distance radar warning systems that were integral to the Cold War. It was not until 1958, and after the federal government deemed the village to be a permanent settlement, that a clinic was established and a nurse available year-round.

Through the JBNQA the Cree Regional Board of Health and Social Services was established as an autonomous body overseeing the full range of health and social service needs of the *Eeyouch*. The Health Board administers all of the health care services in *Eeyou astchee*, including village nursing stations and one hospital (located in Chisasibi) and has worked hard to mediate between traditional therapeutics and biomedicine, always ultimately committed to offering locally meaningful, appropriate and efficacious care (see, for example, Bobbish-Rondeau et al., 1996). The contemporary health care and funding challenges faced by the Health Board, however, frustrate many of these efforts. A recent special assembly on health and social services in *Eeyou astchee* pointed to a host of issues that community members said need greater attention, including high staff turnover and burn-out, to language problems between English or French-speaking staff and Creespeaking clients, the rise of chronic diseases such as diabetes and asthma, increased family violence, and the current housing crisis (Roslin, 1999). In the end, however, it is important to remember that the problems faced by the Cree Regional Board of Health and Social Services are a composite of the growing health care and social needs of the population, limited financial resources, and the constraints of a relatively new system of independent regional management that must contend with all these issues at once.

## **MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS**

Historically, the *Eeyouch* traveled in small family groups and, hence did not develop any large, formal medical tradition. This does not mean, though, that there were no established healing practices or practitioners. There were those who had expert knowledge of the plant resources of the region, while others were gifted spiritual practitioners, employing sweat lodges or other healing ceremonies as required. As well, some women excelled as midwives, a practice that has all but disappeared with the hospitalbased births now requisite in the north. See the next section for a summary of treatment practices.

# **CLASSIFICATION OF ILLNESS, THEORIES OF ILLNESS, AND TREATMENT OF ILLNESS**

Illnesses are most broadly classified as either those that are historically known to the *Eeyouch* and those that came with the influx of non-Native peoples and influences, known colloquially, as "white man's" diseases.

Traditional illness theories are reflections of the landbased cultural knowledge and practice of the *Eeyouch*. Traditional therapies, in turn, draw directly from people's intimate knowledge of the land and its resources combined with a sense of the inherent spiritual force of all animate and inanimate beings as well as a healthy dose of pragmatic realism. Indeed, to this day, there is a general consensus that—regardless of treatment modality—there is a greater spiritual force, derived either from Christian or animistic roots, that ultimately decides one's fate. There were (and remain) individuals who were recognized for their healing abilities and it is this blending of healing power along with a sound knowledge of the indigenous pharmacopoeia which would lead to the greatest treatment success. Whether treatments would or would not work ultimately depended on the fate of a particular individual.

Indigenous therapies were used primarily for the kinds of injuries that one might sustain while traveling or working on the land, such as bone fractures, snow-blindness, burns, or lacerations. There are treatments, too, for common ailments such as toothache, boils, and stomach complaints as well as for post-partum bleeding. Treatments include therapeutic sweat lodges, either when the person is immersed entirely within the lodge or more localized heat treatments (such as around the abdomen or leg), to the specific use of the tamarack or spruce tree inner bark and gum, animal fats and especially rendered bear fat, gallbladder or lung, beaver castoreum, as well as breast milk, tobacco, and meat broth. The abundant bog plant, Labrador tea (*Ledum groenlandicum*), remains a vital part of the contemporary indigenous pharmacopoeia. Labrador tea is regularly harvested and used as a general tonic as well as for a range of pulmonary conditions. Not surprisingly, given the degree to which one depended in the past on mobility, there were a range of therapies devoted to walking disorders, sore muscles, and getting chilled or cold. In particular, feeling cold and lacking an appetite are viewed to this day as precursors to future illness and are treated immediately and with grave concern.

Bush food, and meat in particular, is a source of physical and symbolic strength, vitality, and health and hence not only nutritious but a therapeutic resource, too. There is a hierarchy of strength in bush foods so that the meat, fat, and broth of larger animals, such as bear or caribou, are considered to be especially "strong" whereas wild fowl (goose, ptarmigan, grouse) and fish are somewhat "weaker" foods. So, for example, whereas bear fat is a potent remedy for a number of ailments, the less potent fish broth is considered a sound treatment and an appropriate first food for those who have gone without or have lost their appetite. Most importantly, hunted foods are fundamental to well-being and thus, health, in the *Eeyou* sense of the term; good health is impossible without consuming a full range of (weaker and stronger) traditional foods.

White man's diseases are more readily classified as they cluster as all those that have come with contact, internal colonization, and its lingering and persistent influences and effects. White man's diseases follow, to a large extent, a trajectory common to many other indigenous peoples with similar histories of contact (see above). Today, white man's diseases are predominantly chronic (such as diabetes, cancer, and asthma) but also reflect some of the social ills of the communities that, one might argue, are part of the lingering effects of a system of internal colonization (see below).

White man's medicines are considered appropriate remedies to white man's diseases. Thus, even the most rudimentary biomedical services (such as treatment by 19th-century missionaries or their wives for infections or other ailments) was always accepted as part of the range of treatment options available to the *Eeyouch*. For the coastal dwelling Cree, the annual X-ray ship was oftentimes the only contact with biomedicine in the early half of the 20th century. Community members would line up for their annual exam when the ship arrived at the post site and anyone who was found to have tuberculosis was taken or later sent south to a sanatorium, sometimes for years at a time. By the 1950s, nursing stations, run by the federal government, were set up in the villages and were generally well-used by the *Eeyouch*. If a case required medical consultation, then a physician in an urban hospital center would be contacted by telephone and, if required, the patient would be evacuated by plane from the village. Today, the Cree Regional Board of Health and Social Services maintains all the nursing stations and the hospital in Chisasibi (see above). As throughout the rest of Canada, all medical care is provided free of charge; in

#### **Health through the Life Cycle 619**

addition, members of the communities also receive free all allied health services and required drugs. Despite any concerns about the quality or availability of care through these nursing stations, they are a vital aspect of each community, offering daily and emergency clinics, well-baby clinics, a host of medical information, and the only available pharmacy in the more remote communities.

## **HEALTH THROUGH THE LIFE CYCLE**

### **Pregnancy and Birth**

Each and every child born is a welcome member of the *Eeyou* community. By extension, abortion is considered anathema, whereas miscarriages and stillbirths are fully acknowledged. There is, for the most part, tremendous familial support extended to pregnant women and their infants. With a younger population having babies today, however, there are some basic constraints limiting the degree to which those who would, in the recent past, have cared for the young. Younger mothers, for example, are either still in school or employed and their support network shrinks as grandmothers, also still young, are themselves working outside of the home and unable to offer day-time care to their grandchildren. Child care facilities are now being created in communities where the need for them simply did not exist to this extent a decade ago. By extension, too, all children, regardless of any physical disadvantage, are incorporated into the community. Social stigma of any sort is rare and children are accommodated in whatever way necessary.

Just under 50 years ago all births took place in the family dwelling and, more often than not, this meant on the land. Traditional midwives attended these births and there remains a host of post-partum treatment practices that attest to the skill and knowledge base of these women. By the mid-20th century, most nursing stations were run by nurse–midwives who would regularly assist deliveries. More recently, standard practice is for pregnant women to leave their home community in order to deliver in a hospital. With a small hospital now permanently based in Chisasibi, many of the more northern dwelling *Eeyou* women at least remain in *Eeyou astchee* and do not have to travel late in their pregnancies to an urban center to have their children.

Approximately 70% of women breastfeed their children and while many still consider an extended duration

of breastfeeding normal practice, one study has shown that between 1988 and 1993, the percentage of infants still being breastfed at 6 months had gone from 60% to 40% (although this is still higher than the general provincial target figure of 30%) (Schnarch, 2001). Again, the contingencies of work and family may be playing a large role in this overall reduction in breastfeeding, amongst the younger mothers in particular.

### **Infancy**

Infancy begins at birth and ends with a formal "walking out" ceremony held at about the time when the child takes its first steps. From the time the child is born and right up until this ceremony, the infant is swaddled for warmth, protection, and comfort and is exceptionally wellbundled to protect it from the elements whenever outside. An additional protection used in the past, but cautioned against more recently, was a small necklace made of netting string that was used to "trap" any cold before it entered the infant's body and hence to shield it both physically and spiritually from the cold.

Many parents will prevent their infant's feet from touching the earth or ground until he or she has "walked out." The "walking out" ceremony, traditionally held at the break of dawn on a day soon after the child is just old enough to walk, is a celebration of the symbolic and social transformation of the infant into a future *Eeyou* man or woman. Little boys hold a carved wooden gun, symbolizing their future roles as hunters; little girls hold a carved axe, signifying their roles in maintaining the hunting camp. The young future *Eeyouch*, beautifully and ornately dressed, are assisted out of a ceremonial dwelling by a parent and, witnessed by family and community, can touch the ground for the first time. Symbolizing entry into the communal and natural worlds, the "walking out" ceremony remains an important part of contemporary cultural practice. The ceremony is complete only after a large feast is held, honoring the child as well as the community elders.

Unfortunately, infant mortality rates remain high almost three times that of the province of Quebec (14.9 vs. 5.3 per 1,000 live births)—despite a significant reduction in infant deaths with improved pre-natal health services over the last 20 years (Schnarch, 2001). One infant disease is worthy of particular note. Cree leukoencephalopathy is a neurological disorder that occurs exclusively, albeit rarely, in Cree infants from northern Quebec (and Manitoba). This is a uniformly fatal disease of genetic origin that is triggered by a viral infection and has been found only in this population (Black et al., 1988).

### **Childhood**

Children, and especially the youngest child in the family, are doted upon and given a fair degree of freedom outside of the age-appropriate tasks required of them. Children are not strictly disciplined and, traditionally, are taught primarily by example and by observing and listening to their parents and grandparents. This is especially so when learning about hunting-related activities such as the proper maintenance of firearms, hunting gear, and equipment, as well as weather patterns and other vital bush and camp skills. Children are always dressed warmly and their feet properly protected in order to safeguard them from the harsh sub-Arctic elements, as cold or a chill entering the body is viewed as a precursor to future illness.

There is some disjuncture for some parents between the more rigid processes of school-based learning and investing the child with the proper knowledge base and skills to live and work on the land. This is part and parcel of the contemporary tension between development and traditional practices that permeates so many aspects of the lives of the *Eeyouch*. In an attempt to balance these sometimes divergent objectives, the Cree School Board has implemented a formal Cree language program through to the high school years, instruction only in Cree in the first years of school, and a cultural program that ranges from craft production to land-based activities as part of the general curriculum. With control over education, the Cree School Board continues to work toward a reconciliation between the basic provincial educational requirements and the cultural needs of the children, and more and more children are not only completing high school locally but are traveling out of their communities to complete college and university degrees.

### **Adolescence**

Adulthood symbolically begins for boys when they successfully kill their first large game animal. This has been known to happen when boys are between 8 and 10 years old. Thus there is, historically, no particular period of adolescence. And, given the number of pregnancies and young relationships and marriages today, there remains, for many, virtually no time between childhood and the responsibilities of adulthood (almost 25% of births in *Eeyou astchee* between 1985 and 1998 were to women under 20 years of age [Schnarch, 2001]). A growing concern is the rise in sexually transmitted diseases and, in particular, chlamydia, with a rate of 813/100,000 (compared with 87/100,000 for Quebec), occurring mostly in those between the ages of 15 and 30 (Schnarch, 2001). There has, to date, been no case of AIDS reported, although it is clear that unprotected sex is taking place and is a persistent concern for the public health community serving *Eeyou astchee*.

Adolescence, as something that has evolved with settlement living, is most clearly visible amongst the growing number of youth who are completing a secondary (high school) education, but are increasingly bored with what is for them the drudgery of village life, who see no particular future in their communities as jobs are at a premium and, perhaps through social networks, travel to urban cities or the media, such as satellite television or the internet, are discovering myriad, and oftentimes harmful, ways to alleviate their boredom. Many are smoking (a survey conducted in 1991 found that 77% of those between 15 and 24 years of age were either regular or occasional smokers [Schnarch, 2001]) and there are persistent concerns about substance abuse, vandalism, and accidental injuries and deaths in this young age group.

## **Adulthood**

This stage of life, as mentioned in the previous section, often begins early as young men and women start having children and take on full familial duties while still in school or early on in their lives. The focus here, though, is on the older adults who have experienced dramatic transformations in the course of their lives. Many of the older adults today were born and raised to a young age on the land, then moved into sometimes squalid and certainly under-serviced settlement communities as children. They are the first generation to have had access to a formal educational system (some in more southern communities were placed in residential schools, which had profound effects, both negative and positive, on their future lives) complete with its formal structures and regimented classroom environment. This generation became, too, the first to lead the *Eeyouch* into their new relationship with government, moving out from under a paternalistic system of governance and into an historic, if uncharted, form of selfgovernment. This generation, too, moved from predominantly land-based labor and resources to a substantially more sedentary and stable lifestyle as the village became

#### **References 621**

a permanent home to so many. Foods, and especially those high in sugar and carbohydrates, have become the mainstay in many households whereas fresh fruits and vegetables, exorbitantly priced in the north and often blemished from long travel, remain both unpalatable and unaffordable to many. Many of these social and environmental changes in the adults' lives are directly reflected in their health statistics. Most telling is the shift in mortality and morbidity from infectious to chronic disease. Over the last decade, for example, mortality rates for circulatory disease, diabetes, and cancers overshadow all other causes of death except for those resulting from accidents and injuries. Obesity is a chronic problem for many and diabetes is taking a greater and greater toll on the population, with 11% of the total adult population and almost 30% of those over 50 now diagnosed with the disease (Bobbish-Rondeau et al., 1996; Schnarch, 2001).

Older adult women may now see, during their menopausal and post-menopausal years, the surfacing of a range of joint ailments that result, the elders say, from having been exposed to cold when young. Women are warned throughout their lives to keep warm, and especially so when menstruating. Any diversion from this practice in one's youth will now bear out in sore joints and, especially, sore legs. This is a time too, though, of positive transitions for women: from mothers to grandmothers and future elders. Once past menopause, for example, women may partake in certain symbolically powerful foods that they are prohibited from eating while still in their child-bearing years (e.g., fetal caribou).

### **The Aged**

Older *Eeyouch*, or the elders, are the most highly respected members of the community. The elders were all born and raised on the land and their generation is viewed as the last ones who truly know the physical, spiritual, and symbolic contours of *Eeyou astchee*. They are referred to as grandparents to all of the children, which means, too, that they have a certain degree of authority in the social management of the community's children. The elders are provided with the most and the choicest parts of any hunted foods, are respected authorities on most issues, and are looked after as best as any community is able (given the constraints of the relative availability of adequate housing or other chronic care facility). The elders constitute a very small proportion of the total *Eeyou* population and are now living into their seventies.

### **Dying and Death**

While any death is always traumatic, the death of an elder is viewed as an especially significant loss given their status in the community. The rituals of death, for many *Eeyouch*, are an amalgamation of both Christian and traditional spiritual beliefs. Whereas prior to Christian influence the dead were buried near where they passed away, today burial takes place in the community cemetery immediately following a church service. With the range of spiritual and religious influences in communities today, there is a concomitant range of beliefs about life after death, including those that adhere most strictly to the Christian paradigm of a heavenly afterlife to a traditionalist belief in the transformation of spirit from this life to the next as one proceeds on one's sacred journey.

## **REFERENCES**

- Adelson, N. (2000). *Being alive well: Health and the politics of Cree well-being*. Toronto, Canada: University of Toronto Press.
- Black, D. N., Watters, G. V., Andermann, E., Dumont, C., Kabay, M. E., Kaplan, P. et al. (1988). Encephalitis among Cree children in Northern Quebec. *Annals of Neurology, 24*(4), 483–489.
- Bobbish-Rondeau, E., Boston, P., Iserhoff, H., Jordan, S., Kozolanka, K., & MacNamara, E. et al. (1996). *The Cree experience of diabetes: A qualitative study of the impact of diabetes among the James Bay Cree* (Final report). Chisasibi, Canada: Cree Board of Health and Social Services.
- Dougherty, K. (2001, October 24). Cree get \$3.5-billion deal. *The Gazette*, A1.
- Feit, H. (1986) Hunting and the quest for power: The James Bay Cree and whitemen in the twentieth century. In R. B. Morrison & C. R. Williams (Eds.), *Native peoples: The Canadian experience* (pp. 171–207). Toronto, Canada: McClelland and Stewart.
- Grand Council of the Crees (GCC) (1996). *Never without consent: James Bay Crees stand against forcible inclusion into an independent Quebec*. Toronto, Canada: ECW Press.
- Macpherson, D. (2001, October 25). A new great peace. *The Gazette*, B3.
- Marvelle, N. (2001). Retaliation and reconstruction: The James Bay Cree's success in the aftermath of development. In *Cultural survival*. Available from (http://www.cs.org/internships/cree.htm)
- Roslin, A. (1999). Health concerns pour out at Assembly. *The Nation, 6*(8).
- Schnarch, B. (2001). *Health and what affects it in the Cree communities of Eeyou Istchee*. Montreal, Canada: Cree Board of Health and Social Services of James Bay and the Public Health Module—Cree Region of James Bay.