# 11

# CriminologiCal StudieS

#### G.S. Bajpai

The social sciences in the recent past have become quite specialized. The origin of criminology as specialized branch of learning was a part of this process. It emerged as part of the protest against the prejudiced and discriminating legal practices that were prevalent in the contemporary society of the early eighteenth century. As the discipline developed, it became a science for the study of crime and criminality. Criminology has come to be defined as the study of crime, the causes of crime (etiology), the meaning of crime in terms of law, and community reaction to crime.

Criminological studies began with a dominating sociological perspective. Contemporary criminological thinking was greatly influenced by the writings of sociologists like Durkheim (*suicide*), Robert Merton (*deviance*), Sutherland (*crime as learned behaviour*), and Dahendorf, Sellin, and Vold (*conflict*). In fact, 'sociology of deviance' is one of the core topics in criminology in India.

# **Teaching of Criminology in India**

Criminology—in the form of a special paper—began to be taught in various departments of law/psychology/sociology/social work/anthropology in many universities. The introduction of criminology in the training courses at the jail officers training schools (like at Lucknow in 1940) and police training institutions preceded the introduction of the subject in universities. The University of Saugar (now Dr Hari Singh Gour University) was the first in the country to establish a full-fledged department of criminology and forensic science in 1959.

Many institutions, colleges and universities started criminology as a specialization or independent course. The institutions with mentioning are Christian College, Indore (1950); Madras School of Social Work (1952); Tata Institute of Social Sciences (1954), Mumbai; Bhagalpur University, Bhagalpur (1956); Institute of Social Sciences, Agra University (1957); Kashi Vidya Peeth (started in 1963 but the course has been discontinued); Madras University, Chennai (1965); Karnatak University, Dharwad (1970); and Mysore University (college level). Later, the University of Lucknow, Banaras Hindu University (now discontinued); Bundelkhand University (2002); M. S. University at Thirunelveli (2003); and the National Institute of Criminology and Forensic Science, Delhi (affiliated to Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha University, Delhi) (2004) introduced postgraduate level teaching in criminology and forensic science.

In several other universities/institutions courses on criminology are being organized by the departments of sociology and social work. The University of Lucknow and Bundelkhand University have introduced self-financing courses in criminology. These courses are mostly conducted by the parttime faculty or faculty hired from other social science disciplines.

Thus, criminology is taught in both academic institutions and training institutions.

# *Teaching of Criminology in Academic Institutions*

There are five levels of the teaching of criminology in India:

**a) Independent Departments of Criminology.** Postgraduate level courses in criminology are offered at the Department of Criminology and Criminal Justice, Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai (1954); the Department of Criminology, University of Madras, Chennai (1965); and the Department of Criminology and Criminal Justice, M S University, Thirunelveli (2003). Postgraduate courses in criminology are also conducted by other social sciences departments. For examaple, the Department of Social Work at Lucknow University conducts such a course.

**b) Joint Departments of Criminology and Forensic Science.** Dr Hari Singh Gour University and Karnataka University have departments of criminology and forensic science, which offer courses for both graduate and postgraduate degrees in criminology. The Institute of Forensic Science and Criminology at Bundelkhand University and the National Institute of Criminology and Forensic Science, Delhi, offer only postgraduate level courses.

**c) Diploma Courses.** The Faculty of Law, University of Lucknow, and the Jaipur Law College of the University of Rajasthan, run diploma courses. More recently, the departments of law at Utkal University, Manipur University, Aligarh Muslim University, Panjab University, Panjabi University, University of Jammu, Guru Ghasidas University (Bilaspur), and Jai Narayan Vyas University (Jodhpur), have introduced diploma courses in criminology.

**d) Criminology as an Optional Paper.** The postgraduate departments of sociology, social work, psychology, law, and national law universities in the country also have the subject of criminology as an optional paper in their curricula.

**e) Distance Education Courses.** Correspondence courses in criminology are available. The Department of Criminology and Forensic Science, Dr Hari Sing Gour University, conducts a PostGraduate diploma in criminology and police administration. The Department of Criminology and Criminal Justice Administration, M. S. University, Thirunelveli, also has a PG level correspondence course in criminology and police science.

#### *Criminology in Training Institutions*

There are specific training institutions where criminology forms a part of the training programmes for the functionaries of the criminal justice administration. They include the national Institute of Criminology and Forensic Science, New Delhi; the National Institute of Social Defence, New Delhi; the Indian Institute of Public Administration, New Delhi; and SVP National Police Academy, Hyderabad. State police academies, training colleges and schools, jail training schools, and regional correctional institutes also have a fairly wide coverage of criminology. Inputs of criminological relevance form a part of such training programmes. The inclusion of inputs is based on the requirements of various courses.

The above account makes it clear that criminology as part of the curricula of various social science disciplines has continued without any further significant development. In its journey of some seven decades, not many departments were opened. However, some departments were discontinued; this development sends out some critical signals.

#### *Sociological Content in Syllabi of Criminology*

The subject matter of criminology captures considerable sociological content in the existing teaching and research arrangements in Indian academic institutions. As an application science, criminology uses sociological theories and concepts in the interpretation of crime and criminality. In a survey of the research on criminology within the frame of sociology/social anthropology, it would be pertinent to have an idea of the core contents of criminology displaying sociological thrust. A perusal of the existing syllabi of criminology shows that the sociological contents in criminology mainly include sociological definition of crime, deviance and its interpretation from social structure perspectives, theory of anomie (Durkheim and Merton), subculture theories of crime, conflict theories (Simmel, Sellin, Vold, Dahendorf), social construction of deviance, social interactionist perspective, social process theories like the differential association theory, and the delinquency drift theory (Matza and Reckless). Critiques of the social system vis-à-vis deviance is also a recurrent theme in criminology. This apart, one often comes across 'sociology of crime' and 'criminal sociology' in the syllabi of criminology. Besides, criminological researches in India also employ the social research methodology.

# **Institutional Development and Publications**

#### *Funding for Research and Publication of Journals*

The Bureau of Police Research and Development (BPRD), Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), New Delhi, started funding researches in criminology. It initiated a fellowship scheme for doctoral students. The BPRD began publishing useful data, and also started two journals for criminological writings, *The Indian Police Journal* and *'Police Vigyan'* (in Hindi).

The LNJN National Institute of Criminology and Forensic Science (NICFS), New Delhi, is another organization that gives training in the administration of criminal justice. The NICFS publishes *The Indian Journal of Criminology and Criminalistics.*

The Indian Council of Social Science Research (ICSSR) has also been instrumental in funding criminological projects and extending doctoral fellowships. It has covered criminology in all its surveys of research in sociology.

The Fulbright Foundation has included criminology in its fellowship programme. The University Grants Commission and the Commonwealth Commission also grant funds to carry out criminological research in foreign countries.

#### *Professionalization*

More than its independent character, criminology in India has developed as an integral part of the social sciences.1 The curriculum of sociology at the postgraduate level embraces criminological areas like sociology of deviant behaviour, juvenile delinquency, conflict, social disorganization, and the like. The contents of the social problems segment of the sociology curriculum also carry issues of criminological relevance.

The interface of criminology with psychology and anthropology is quite significant. Psychology and anthropology contributed a great deal to the development of abnormal or criminal psychology and to the analysis of constitutional provisions. The interdisciplinary direction in criminology is a major characteristic of this discipline. The methodology used in criminological studies is basically sociological. In addition, psychological testing, anthropological measurements, and social work-specific field studies are also carried out as part of criminological research.

Professionalization of criminology as a subject is clearer in certain sectors. Criminological contents, for instance, form part of the training of criminal justice personnel. The private security industry and detective services also rely on criminological inputs. However, this has not bolstered the subject because the end-users of criminology did not develop any direct channel to make use of the trained manpower in this area.

#### 510 g.S. Bajpai

One index of the professionalization of the discipline is the formation of an association of professionals and the publication of journals devoted to a given speciality. In this regard, there are useful developments in Indian criminology. There is now a professional body, the Indian Society of Criminology (ISC). The ISC publishes a refereed journal, *Indian Journal of Criminology.* The Indian Society of Victimology (1994) is another forum for criminologists. In 2003, a forum as RC 18 on 'Sociology of Crime and Deviance' was constituted under the auspices of the Indian Sociological Society. The Indian Social Science Association has also supported work on criminology.

The National Crime Records Bureau, New Delhi, brings out a journal called *Crime in India* which contains crime statistics. The National Institute of Social Defence, New Delhi, also carries out many activities of criminological interest. This institute publishes *Social Defence,* which carries articles of criminological interest.

It becomes clear that support and infrastructure for criminological pursuits are quite limited. There are limited funding opportunities for criminological researches in India. The publication of journals in this area is also limited.

# **Connecting the Present Survey with Earlier Surveys**

So far there have been three efforts, within the framework of the ICSSR survey of research in sociology and social anthropology, to document criminological studies. The first trend report was part of 'Social Work Research' (Ranade 1974). The report 'Sociology of Deviant Behaviour' (Shukla 1985) was prepared for the second ICSSR survey. In the third ICSSR survey, the report 'Crime, Delinquency and Correctional Methods' (Singh 2000a was also included).

The three survey reports, mentioned above, have covered the work conducted in criminology till 1994. The present report intends to cover the post-1994 period in criminological studies. Here, a brief recapitulation of these survey reports will be in order.

The first survey report (Ranade 1974) was not fully devoted to criminological studies as it was mainly a survey of researches in social work. It, however, contained a few studies of criminological interest conducted before 1969 in India. This covered, the basic textbooks and articles published on criminological topics. Criminology in India, at that point of time, was evolving and therefore there were not many empirical studies.

The second survey report, 'Sociology of Deviant Behaviour', covered the period 1969–79. Besides documenting important research work, it reflected upon various factors affecting the quantum and quality of research in this discipline. This publication also dealt with certain other issues significant to the development of this discipline. It presented not only an extensive range of work in criminology but also developed insightful arguments and observations, unfolding the development of teaching and research in this area. It brought forth the issues and areas affecting the growth of this subject in India. The scheme of classification of topics in this work was deviance among men, women, juveniles; suicide; de-notified communities; drug addiction; youth unrest; and correction. The report noted the dearth of doctoral and post-doctoral works in criminology, lack of sociological interpretation of the phenomena hindering the growth of this discipline, and over-reliance on foreign tools and techniques in the absence of indigenous methodologies. It, suggested, *inter alia*, that crime and deviance need to be linked and seen in the broader context of mainstream sociological thinking. It also suggested that social structural, functional, and social change-related perspectives should be used in the interpretation of crime and deviance. It also recommended longitudinal and interdisciplinary studies on crime.

While the focus in the second survey was on deviance, in the third survey it was on crime, delinquency, and correctional methods. It covered the work undertaken between 1979 and 1994. The set of problems and the context were found to have changed as compared to the earlier report. Several new areas like victimology, collective violence, and organized criminality were covered in the third survey, thus enlarging the scope of the subject. Compared to earlier surveys, this report refrained from specifically commenting on, or critically analysing, the general scenario concerning teaching, research, and practice of criminology. The report, in the closing paragraphs, however, concluded '… the researches in the area of crime, delinquency and correctional methods are almost sketchy'. It noted the absence of theory building, monitoring and evaluation studies, time series, and prediction studies in criminology. The lack of proper utilization of research in policy purposes was also highlighted in this report.

#### *The Present Report*

The present report forms part of the fourth survey of research in sociology and sociology commissioned by the Indian Council of Social Science Research, New Delhi. The works published in the period from 1995 to 2003 have been given space in this endeavour.2

The collection of data for this exercise was tedious. Unlike other disciplines, criminological studies exists in almost all social sciences and therefore involved a wider search. To collect the necessary information, a proforma was circulated to the social science departments in various universities/ institutions in the country. In addition, with the help of the directory of social scientists, individual scholars were contacted to obtain their list of publications. Unfortunately, in both cases there was a poor response rate; only about 20 per cent of those contacted responded. To salvage the situation, all the major libraries in New Delhi, Mumbai, and some other places were visited.3

# **Research Trends**

The task of trend analysis in criminological studies is rather difficult primarily due to the fact that studies do not follow a uniform approach in terms of concepts, orientation, and method. It may be reiterated that the entire gamut of works published in India during the specified period could not, therefore, be covered.

In the present section, an attempt has been made to explain and analyse the trends in criminological studies based on 465 studies covered in this survey.

|               | Frequency | Percentage |
|---------------|-----------|------------|
| Empirical     | 185       | 39.78      |
| Non-Empirical | 280       | 60.21      |
| Total         | 465       | 100        |

**Table 11.1** natures of Studies

*Source:* Author's own.

Table 11.1 presents the nature of studies in terms of empirical or non-empirical conducted during 1995–2003 in India. As is evident from the data, a sizeable number of studies (60.21 per cent) were of non-empirical nature. Only 39.78 per cent studies were empirical. Though one does not find exact comparable data in the previous survey on this subject it can safely be said that the extent of empirical studies in criminology has increased during this period. This is despite the fact that the number of journals in this area has not increased significantly.

| Patterns of<br>Crime | Criminal<br>Justice<br>Adminis-<br>tration | Correction | Victimo-<br>logy | Juvenile<br>Delinquency | Human<br>Rights | Crime<br>Prevention<br>and Control |
|----------------------|--------------------------------------------|------------|------------------|-------------------------|-----------------|------------------------------------|
| 173                  | 40                                         | 38         | 109              | 16                      | 54              | 47                                 |
| 37.20%               | 8.60%                                      | 8.17%      | 23.44%           | 3.44%                   | 11.61%          | 9.86%                              |

**Table 11.2** major themes in Criminological Studies

*Source:* Author's own.

Table 11.2 classifies the total 465 works surveyed in this exercise in terms of themes. The data presents a varied picture. Studies in victimology were the most preferred choice (23.44 per cent) of criminologists during this period. Almost half of these studies focussed on women victimization. A considerable amount of researches (22.15 per cent) remained confined to various forms of crimes. Collective violence (9.3 per cent), drug addiction (4.2 per cent) and criminality by women (3.5 per cent) received greater attention. Several new forms of crimes forming a pattern were also seen to have escalated (37.20 per cent) considerably. The mounting interest of criminologists in human rights (11.61 per cent) was seen as a prominent trend during the period of this study. Criminal justice, correction, and crime prevention were also adequately represented while studies on juvenile delinquency had a relatively low priority (3.44 per cent) for criminologists. The focus of criminologists on victimological studies, especially women victimization and human rights issues, is an emerging trend in criminology. Victim-oriented studies, for instances, substantially increased during this period as several new legislations addressing the needs and problems were brought in and existing laws were altered in the interests of victims. Judicial and social activism as well as the movement of civil society for the victim also promoted victimological studies in this period. Community policing and crime prevention too started gaining attention in this decade owing to the considerable emphasis of law enforcement agencies on such practices.

| Year  | Frequency | Percentage |
|-------|-----------|------------|
| 1995  | 58        | 12.47      |
| 1996  | 45        | 9.70       |
| 1997  | 47        | 10.10      |
| 1998  | 27        | 5.8        |
| 1999  | 58        | 12.47      |
| 2000  | 53        | 11.39      |
| 2001  | 63        | 13.54      |
| 2002  | 86        | 18.49      |
| 2003  | 28        | 6.02       |
| Total | 465       | 100.00     |

**Table 11.3** Year-wise growth of literature in Criminology

Table 11.3 shows the yearly growth of literature in criminology in India during 1995–2003 (nine years). Except for the years 1998 and 2002, the number of publications was upward of 8 per cent. In 1998, the percentage fell to 5.8 but went on rising and was as high as 18.49 per cent in 2002. In 2003, it came down to 6.02 per cent.

| Categories                    | Frequency | Per cent |
|-------------------------------|-----------|----------|
| Journal Articles              | 295       | 63.44    |
| Books                         | 65        | 13.97    |
| Doctoral/ other Dissertations | 98        | 21.07    |
| Inst.Publications/ Monographs | 11        | 2.36     |
| Total                         | 465       | 100      |

#### **Table 11.4** Form of Studies

Table 11.4 depicts the form in which the studies have appeared. In most cases (63.44 per cent), the studies were in the form of papers in various journals. Doctoral and other dissertations have also had a significant share: 21.07 per cent of the total publications (N = 465). Books had a percentage of only 2.36 in this context.

The report of the second survey of research had expressed concern about the decline in the number of doctoral dissertations. The increasing trend in this category of study in the present survey is therefore a remarkable development.

What also emerges from the analysis is that most studies on subjects of criminological interest were conducted by social scientists hailing from sister disciplines like sociology, psychology, law, and social work. A sizeable amount of literature has also been produced by criminal justice professionals including police officials, lawyers, and judges. The writings in this category invariably remained impressionistic. The research projects sponsored by government agencies have also contributed a good deal to criminological literature.

#### *Criminological Studies*

The growth and development of the sociology of deviance in the framework of Indian sociology is a significant development. The keenness of sociologists in this country to understand the social reality of crime, especially in the face of rapid socio-political changes, has prompted research and studies in the area of criminology. Sociologists have, to some extent, applied the theoretical concepts of sociology in studying criminology in India. This application has produced some rudimentary knowledge about the dynamics of criminality. The sociologists could not go far from this stage to capture the worldwide trends in criminology. Notably, criminology during this period was taking a new turn in the world as newer and more specific theories were being evolved to understand and analyse criminality. This gap is still seen in Indian criminology. While this subject has reached a status of a completely independent science in most countries of the world, in India that stage has not yet arrived.

Present below are summaries of the trends of research in terms of different themes covered by researchers.

**Studies Related to Emerging Patterns in Crime and Deviance.** Criminology in India in the 1990s underwent major changes as far as content, focus, methods, and research priorities are concerned. Earlier surveys conducted in criminology have shown that the focus of research was mainly on correctional studies and juvenile delinquency. These themes still occupy a major place but many new areas have emerged. For example, issues relating to victimology, human rights, child abuse, women victimization, cyber crime, economic crimes, and criminalization of politics, and the like were focussed on extensively in criminological researches. This section intends to focus on a range of issues which figured in the studies under the period of review.

Many aspects of the criminalization of politics have been analysed by Bhan (1995). The focus of the study was on the role of competitive politics and the use of money and muscle power in the arena of political process in India. As an aspect of crime and deviance, corruption was studied by Sahai (1995) who explored the linkage of corruption with politics.

Examining various aspects of habitual offenders, Susheela Babji (1995) highlighted the legal and sociological factors. The patterns of crime distribution over space and their linkages have been analysed and interpreted by Mary Jose (1995). K.P. Krishna (1995) analysed some psychological approaches in the study of criminal behaviour. The causes of crime are quite specific in India as observed by K.F. Rustamji (1996). Y.S. Bhadauria (1996) looked into the personal profile of 200 'history-sheeters' in UP. Measures like adequate aftercare and NGO action have been suggested in this study to rehabilitate the 'history sheeters'. Ram Ahuja (1996) discussed various aspects of and remedies for the problem of youth and crime. B.V. Trivedi and Rita Tiwari (1997) did a study on habitual offenders. Sindwani and Paul Choudhary (1996) made a comparative analysis of metropolitan crime rates in the cities of New Delhi and Houston (USA).

Latha, et al. (1996) described the role of social support groups in cases of attempted suicide. Versha Millicans (1998) compared attempted suicides and homicides in terms of socio-psychological and pathological factors. Based on a sample of 300 cases, the study concluded that while property disputes were the root of homicides, depression and tension led to suicides. Malik et al. (2000) ascertained the motives behind homicides in a study conducted on 270 inmates of Hissar Jail in Haryana. A sizeable number of respondents said that they were not actually involved in the cases for which they had been implicated. Bajpai (1997b) discussed the implications of the liberalization of the economy on crimes and policing. A study by J.A. Mitra (1997) focused on the growth of crime in major urban communities by attempting a comparison of the crime pattern in the cities of Mumbai and Montreal (Canada). Mohammad M. Hussainat (1998) examined leisure and its association with crime and found a significant relationship between the two variables. Dawar Parvez (1998) brought together a range of approaches and views in the explanations of criminal behaviour with a special focus on the psychological profile of organized violence involving a sample of 143 respondents from Bangalore and Delhi.

Criminal behaviour was also explained through psychological approaches. Arvind Verma (1999) observed that police statistics about crimes remain too superficial as they does not show the extent of the crime. Vidu Mohan and Shabnam Priyadarshini (1999) assessed the relationship between assertiveness and the experience of eve-teasing. Conducted on 102 respondents, the study did not find any relationship between the two variables. In a study on a sample of 140 respondents in Durgapur, Mitra (1999) found no significant relationship between overall development and crime. On the contrary, an unbalanced development was found to have created conditions which gave rise to crime. Premlata (1999) studied the attitudes among criminal and non-criminal populations towards crime. A personality study was conducted on women heroin addicts by Sadia Habib (1999a) in Mumbai on a sample of 280 addicts and non-addicts. The two groups showed considerable difference in terms of their socio-economic status, family background, and moral values. Sivamurthy (1999b) made a study of the patterns of crime. His study on theft in the temples of Tamil Nadu and the concentration and dispersion of crimes in the state highlighted several aspects of the problem. S.P. Singh (2002) prepared the *Encyclopaedia of Criminology*. The varied practices of handling offenders in pre-and post-independent India have been discussed by A.S. Raj (2000). The need for an action-oriented approach to respond to crime in cities was suggested by Jayanta Mitra (2000). A range of motives behind criminal homicides was discussed in a study by Pratap S. Malik et al. (2000). The nature and characteristics of criminal propensity amongst prisoners in Indian jails were highlighted by S. Sanyal (2000). The role of the judiciary and citizens against corruption in public offices has been studied by Acharyulu (2000). Satya Pal Singh (2001) suggested broad electoral reforms, fast-track courts, and the implementation of the recommendations of the National Police Commission to break the nexus between politicians and criminals. D.C. Nath (2001) enumerated the nuances of industrial security.

Different forms of ragging among male students in the hostels of the medical college in Chennai were studied by S. Ramdoss and M. Srinivasan (2000). Focusing upon a sample of 100 students, the paper revealed that 61 per cent of the respondents were subjected to ragging. It also examined the reporting behaviour of the victims of ragging and evaluated the impact of the Tamilnadu Prohibition of Ragging Act, 1997.

The issue of deviance among street children was studied by R. Thilagraj and M. Priyamvadha (2000). Based on a sample of 706 children in Chennai, it was revealed that these children had the habits of smoking, drinking, drug addiction, gambling, etc. The influence of peer groups was also found to generate deviance among them.

There is a typological edge to the stereotypological 'hardened criminal' but at the same time, there are many alternative responses which are overtly silent in similarly expressed behaviour patterns. These were the observations in a paper on typology of hardened criminals by Peter O. (2000). Investigating the reasons why commit crimes, Arvind Verma (2000) studied 500 female offenders—adults and juveniles—and concluded that family size, education level, income, and breakdown of social ties were the major factors behind crimes.

The dawn of twenty-first century also witnessed the incidence of cyber deviance. Crimes using information technology and computer software are increasingly becoming the concern of law enforcement agencies. The rising trends in crime and corruption in the context of the present-day digital age have been explained in by Sahai (2000). B.B. Nanda and R.K. Tiwari (2000) have discussed some of the aspects of this issue. Agrawal (2002) suggested preventive and investigative measures for controlling cyber crimes and recommended the creation of cyber sensitive police. L.C. Amarnathan (2002) was of the view that technological advancements have a bearing on the emerging forms of crime. B.R. Sharma (2002) presented a case study on forgery in which the criminal manipulated the computer.

Homosexual behaviour and its causes were analysed by S.V. Sudhakar (2001), focusing on 100 inmates in Borstal institution. Lali (2001) found the prevalence of stress among prison officials. Froid Xavier (2002) revealed the impact of sexually and criminally motivated advertisements on adolescents. Jean Dreze and Reetika Khera (2000) examined the case of gender crime in India. V.S. Bose and K. Radha Krishanamurthy (2002) presented a profile of crime and violence in India. A study on the relationship between design and the chances of burglary (Sivamurthy 2002) concluded that independent houses, first floors of apartment complexes, and private housing colonies are easy targets for burglars. The rising trend in organized crime involving the youth in the city of Mumbai was studied by Sumita Sarkar (2002b). The study adopted the perspective of 'political economy of crime'. B.N. Commenting on the linkages between development and crime, Chattoraj (2002) observed that crime prevention planning should be research based. In his book *Development without Disorders,* Bajpai (2002d) examined the criminogenic aspects of development. This volume looked into the implications of development for crime in diverse contexts. Mohammad Irfan and Sajid Ali Khan (2002) found significant differences amongst 288 truants and non-truants in their achievement motivation in respect of certain socio-economic variables. R. Thilagraj (2002a) studied youth crime vis-à-vis police. James Vadackumchery, in his writings on crime and society (1999a), police and crimes (2002), and on human behaviour and law enforcement, reflected on a wide range of issues. Sharda Prasad (2003) depicted the status of crime and punishment in the Sanskrit drama *Mrichhkatikam*.

#### *Crime and Deviance*

**Drug Addiction.** The pattern of drug abuse is shaped by several factors, according to Narendra Prasad Misra (1995) who studied 300 cases in the city of Lucknow. Sushila Nahar (1995) made a sociological analysis of the problem amongst the youth in the city of Indore. A similar study was conducted among college students in the city of Jabalpur (Sharma 1995). The effects of social structure and social process of drug addiction were examined by Shyam Lal (1995). Sadia Habib (1998) examined the personality correlates of 280 women heroin addicts and non-addicts in Ghazipur of UP. Preeti Pande (1997) carried out a study on 250 abstainers and relapsers in Delhi and found significant differences in various variables in the two groups. Some other pertinent studies on the subject of drug abuse are by Urmil Sharma (1996), Diwakar Sukul (1997), and M.S. Bedi and P.K. Bajpai (1997). In an opinionated study, Sain (1995) discussed the environmental pollution-related aspects of drug addiction.

L. N. Suman and S.V. Nagalakshmi (1997) found the impact of alcoholism to be quite damaging on the interpersonal perceptions of spouses. Jyothi Mehra (1995) explained the role of peer groups in influencing drug and criminal behaviour. A study on some de-addiction centres in Delhi by Rajesh Kumar (2000) found that sociological factors cause relapses in drug addiction. D. R. Singh (2000b) assessed the drug addiction situation in Goa. Anuradha (2001) noted that there are particular social and personality characteristics of alcoholics and drug addicts. Selwyn Stanley (2001) observed the effects of alcohol in creating complications in marriages.

**Violence.** Bajpai (1996) explored the role of the state and of social and economic policies in the persistence of violence in the state of Bihar. The paper focussed on the policies and implementation of official programmes in the context of rising forms of agrarian violence. M.L. Nirmala and G.P. Daniel (1998) highlighted public perceptions of violence. The issue of tribal violence was delineated by Susheela Bhan (1999). Her work focussed on the impact of ethnic violence on the youth in Kokrajhar, Assam. Excessive use of force and different forms of domestic violence can have telling effects on the victims and can turn them into violent people, as was shown in a study by Anjali Dave et al. (2001). S. Sridevi Goel (2001) discussed cases of violent clashes and caste riots. He highlighted the steps initiated by the Tamil Nadu Government and police to restore peace among scheduled castes and backward class people involved in caste clashes.

Some countermeasures to contain suicide bombers in the context of the attack on the Indian Parliament on 13 December 2001, and on the World Trade Center Towers were discussed by Kalyan Rudra (2001a*,* 2001b). He is of the view (2002a) that the unbridled influx of migrants from various Asian countries has resulted in demographic imbalances, which are causing social tension. He illustrated this point by discussing the insurgency in the north-eastern states.

**Terrorist Violence.** In the last three decades of the twentieth century there was a considerable rise in terrorist violence in India. Social scientists and criminal justice professionals published scores of papers, books, project reports, and articles in the popular and professional journals on this issue. However, these publications were largely impressionistic and opinionated.

In his book on terrorism, S.K. Ghosh (1995) highlighted the emerging forms of terrorism such as kidnapping, abduction, extortion, bombing, etc., around the world and a specially in India. The data used in this study is from secondary sources. B.P. Singh Sehgal (1995) discussed the genesis of terrorism and its expression in the context of human rights. Sharda Jain (1995) was of the view that terrorism is a product of bad politics and not necessarily a result of socio-economic injustice. The issue of victims of terrorism was relatively less explored. Bajpai (2002b) studied these 'insecured people' in terms of the impact of terrorism as perceived and experienced by the people living in the terrorist-affected regions. Tripathy (1995) wrote on the human aspects of inhuman killings.

Rajeev Kumar Sinha (1995) presented an overview of crimes affecting state security. His analysis was based on a survey of the recent trends in the emerging forms of terrorism. Information was collected from a small sample of 53 respondents representing students, professionals, and non-professionals. There was a consensus against surrender to terrorism and in favour of making the law enforcement machinery honest and efficient. It would be relevant to mention studies on narcoterrorism, on true stories of terrorism in the West (Ajaib Singh 1996), on the international terrorism, on the dimensions of terrorism and violence, on tackling insurgency and terrorism (Sarkar 1998), and on terrorism and political development.

In the subsequent years, terrorism continued to attract criminal justice professionals. Ashima Jahangir (2000), discussed terrorism, Guerrilla warfare, and global trends in terrorism, respectively, in their books. Singh (2000) analyzed terrorism in Punjab and the global situation of terrorism, respectively. Similar works highlighting international terrorism and formal legal instruments (Gupta 2001), insurgency and counter insurgency, and trends in terrorism in the new millennium also appeared in the survey period. Based on a sample of 100 police officials Nayak (2001) did an impact analysis of insurgency and extremism. There are studies which focused on terrorism in the contexts of human rights, polity, and democracy. Fadanvis 2002; Ingle and Ingle 2002; Kamath 2002; Kumar 2002; Parasnis 2002; Patil 2002; Raghavan 2002; Ram 2002; Sharma 2002; Shrivas 2002; Sirpurkar 2002; Sovani 2002. Iyer (2002) explored the nature, extent, and factors in Left extremist violence in Bihar. Chander (2003) delineated the various facets of cyber terrorism.

**Organized and Economic Crimes.** Criminologists and criminal justice professionals have carried out scores of studies on organized and economic crimes.

An article published by A. K. Singh (1999) discussed the issue of kidnapping for ransom. The article traces kidnapping in the historical perspective and explores the profile of victims of kidnapping. S.P. Singh's (2001) study is on key issues in economic crimes. The loopholes in economic policies are normally exploited by economic offenders. The author suggests the strict enforcement of regulations. Prabhat Chandra Tripathi (1997) analysed the menace of white-collar crimes and stressed the need for a separate court of law for such offences.

There are certain new forms of organized economic criminality. Money laundering is a case in point. A paper by Mukesh Jain (2000) highlighted the use of money laundering for illegal gains. It suggested raising the awareness level of law enforcement agencies about this crime and stressed the need for stringent laws. The author advocates the need for overhauling the law enforcement machinery in terms of resources, training, and skills. He also proposes measures relating to judicial and law enforcement practices. The problem of economic crimes, especially fraud and scams, can be handled proactively by the police. Shyamsundar (2002) explained the process of proactive community policing and the effective implementation of laws and regulations.

An empirical study by Sumita Sarkar (2002a) on the issue of combating organized crime in Mumbai city found inadequacies in the laws in terms of their effectiveness in dealing with offenders. Sarkar (2002b) also studied the involvement of youth in hard-core crimes in Mumbai in her doctoral dissertation. A study by Sivamurthy (2003) on 509 victims of burglary in Chennai concluded that offenders avoid committing crimes in public view and the surveillance of the victims' residences did not make much difference to them. The dearth of empirical studies in this area, as emerges in the present survey, is a significant feature of the analysis.

**Female/Women Criminality.** B.N. Parmar (1995) conducted a study on the sociological aspects of female criminality in Gujarat. Dealing with the psychological aspects of criminal behaviour among women, Ravinder Dang and Madhu Sharma (1995) found that female offenders had a higher score on neuroticism than normal persons. William S. Thomas (1995) studied women criminals in Tamil Nadu. K. Dhanlakshmi (1996) presented a sociological and behavioural analysis of convicted female offenders in Hyderabad Central Jail. B.V. Trivedi and Rita Tiwari (1996) studied the socio-economic profile of 104 female offenders. Arti Rao (1996) studied the trafficking of girls from Nepal into brothels in India. Recently, incest has also emerged as crucial aspect of victimization. Sharma (1996) analysed some case studies of fathers raping their minors. Pramod Chouksey (1997) conducted a study of 200 prostitutes in Gwalior, Raipur, and Indore. P.D. Sabastian (1997) approached the question of prevention and control of prostitution from a sociolegal standpoint.

Sarita Sarangi and Anima Sen (1998) studied bride-burning cases to reflect on the psychological characteristics of females accused (25 cases). Sunita Sharma (2001) studied 225 female offenders and analysed the familial, social, and other factors contributing to criminal behaviour. Mridula Gunvant Manyar (2002) made an intensive study of the lifestyles of women criminals. Arun Kumar Singh et al. (2002) did a comparative study on female criminals and non-criminals (165 cases in all) to assess the relative levels of adjustments and poor adjustment amongst female criminals. The same authors, in another study conducted on 200 male and female offenders in Bihar, looked into achievement, motivation, and aggression. Verma (2003) analysed the personality traits, value orientation, criminal tendency and other features of women criminality.

#### *Criminal Justice Administration*

The problem and issues relating to police, prosecution, and correction were key themes in criminological studies throughout the survey period. Criminologists and practitioners paid considerable attention to criminal justice administration in India. However, studies in police administration or judicial administration have not been included as they fall beyond the scope of this survey.

While examining the case of battered wives, Maneesha Kochar (1995) emphasized the need to bring changes in legal statutes, training of police officials, and in social attitudes. Pritee Sharma (1995) covered a sample of 250 magistrates, lawyers, and police officials to examine the role of courts in crime prevention and control. The issue of expenditures and delay in dispensing justice was highlighted in her study. Kumar and Stanley (1995, 1996) reflected on the state of criminal and correctional administration in India. S.M. Diaz (1996) suggested 'decriminalization of offences' as a way to decongest the courts from spilling over with cases and the consequent delay in their disposal. R. Thilagraj and Prasanna (1998) traced the opinions of criminal justice and non-criminal justice professionals on corruption in a study conducted on 190 respondents in Chennai. Namita Bhatia (1998), in her doctoral dissertation, identified the causes of marital discords. Focusing on 243 cases in Delhi, the study reviewed the functioning of family courts and the mode of settlements in resolving the discords.

The juvenile justice system has been a frequent subject in criminological studies. Ved Kumari (1996) presented a plea for review of the Juvenile Justice Act. B.N. Chattoraj (1999) suggested ways and means of effectively implementing the Juvenile Justice Act. Lalnunthara (1996) carried out an evaluation of juvenile courts in Mizoram. Lata Krishnamurthy (1996) discussed the issue of role conflict and tension experienced by women police. Pande (1996) studied the status of adolescent offenders in criminal justice administration. Broad issues pertaining to police, court, people, and justice have been documented by Vadackumchery (1997a). The status and problems of victims vis-à-vis criminal justice systems was specially studied by Bharat Das (1997), B. C. Rajkumar (1997), and S. Arumgaswamy (1997). N.K. Chakraborty (1997) edited five volumes covering a vast range of articles written by various authors on diverse themes relating to criminal justice administration, viz., social defence, correctional services, correctional institutions, probation system, juvenile justice system, etc. Pragya Mathur (1997) suggested ways to curb the stress experienced by police officials. P.D. Sharma (1998) delineated various facets of criminal justice administration in India along with the performance of and problems in this system. The interrelationship of police, people, and criminal justice administration was highlighted by James Vadackumchery (1999b).

A critical analysis of the juvenile justice system was done by S. Muthuswamy (1999b). J.M. Qureshi (1999) studied variations in police discretion in the United Kingdom and in India. A study highlighting the relationship between the police and magistrates was carried out by Gopal Krishan (2000). Durga Mishra (2000) studied the history of the relationship between police and jail administration.

Sesha Kethineni and Tricia Klosky (2000) discussed the impact of juvenile justice reforms in India. Rafiq Ur Rahman (2000) listed the new challenges that criminal justice would face in the twenty-first century. Raj Kumar (2000) compiled an encyclopaedia of laws relating to women. A study of probation services in the context of criminal justice policy has been conducted by N.K. Chakraborty (2001). Kamal Kumar (2001) discussed the issues affecting the performance of the criminal justice system in India. There are studies highlighting discretion in the sentencing policy (Das 2001) and the juvenile court system (Mohammed 2001). Durga Das Panda (2002) and K. Sreedhar Rao (2002) dwelt on the question of revamping the criminal justice system in India. Prit Paul Kaur (2002) found that the police in India face conflicting socio-legal values which hamper delivery of justice to women. G.S. Bajpai (2002a) analysed restorative justice as an emerging conflict management solution. Jand (2003) evaluated the role of forensic science in the administration of criminal justice in Punjab.

The awakening generated by the large number of studies in this area has facilitated many policy-based changes in the criminal justice system. The rise in such studies was also prompted by the reports of the National Police Commission and the Law Commission.

#### *Correctional Administration Studies*

Correctional administration is a key area in criminological studies. This section covers empirical studies conducted on this subject.

Bhanu Shamsher Jung Bahadur Rana (1996) looked into the nature of crime and punishment during the *Manusmriti* period. The issue of under trial prisoners giving rise to overcrowding in prisons has been analysed by A.S. Raj (1996) who identified the causes and suggested remedies. N.K. Chakraborty (1995) made a study on the efficiency of the probation system in West Bengal. Literacy among prisoners and the resultant ego strength was analysed in a paper by R. Bharadwaj (1995). The problems of prisoners with AIDS were highlighted by Soam Sundaram and Sumithra (1997). Vrinda Datta and Sona Kunte (1998) studied adolescent inmates and their aspirations for the future. The study, covering a sample of 60 inmates, boys and girls, revealed that the institutions offer very little to the inmates for to their psycho-social needs. The factors responsible for runaway children (on a sample of 100 cases from Delhi) were studied by S.L. Tandon and Geetika Suri (1998). In a follow-up article, Sneh Lata Tandon (1999) wrote about policies and programmes for runaway children. A critical analysis of the shortcomings in correctional institutions in India was made by Sumitra and Soam Sundaram (1998). Amulya Khurana (1999) showed how practices like *vipassana*<sup>4</sup> and meditation can help in the mental well-being of undertrial prisoners. In another study on the effects of *vipassana* meditation on 296 prisoners in Tihar Jail in Delhi, Amulya Khurana et al. (2002) found that it significantly contributed to the subjective well-being of the prisoners making them more responsible. Maharwarkar (2002) analysed various aspects of prison administration in Karnataka. Focusing on 500 inmates in the central jails of Madhya Pradesh (M. P.), Deepak Gupta (1999) studied work programmes in jails and found that the inmates did not exhibit enough interest for the various trades. The jobs they learnt were also found to be of little value in their rehabilitation. Rajashekar (2002) made a plea for humanizing the living conditions in prisons. Mohammad M.S. Al-Sahi (2000) studied the comparative modes of treatment in three countries, viz., the United Kingdom, United Arab Emirates, and India. Arvind tiwari (2002) assessed the status of medical services in prisons. The system of visits by parttime doctors was found to be lacking in quality of service. The HRD climate, innovations, work involvement, job satisfaction, flexibility, and role clarity were observed to be significant of in a study of organizational commitment carried out by Anuradha Sharma and Jaidev. Sarangi (2002) on a sample of 180 prison staff from the selected jails. In another study, the same authors (2003) emphasized the scope of participatory management in prisons by involving prisoners for job deliveries. Arun Kumar et al. (2002) conducted a study an 400 male and female offenders on achievement and aggression and found a high degree of aggression among the males.

Relevant in this context are also some articles and books that cannot be classified as research studies. The complaint ones are mentioned below.

S.M. Diaz (1995b) discussed the concept and practice of probation. The practice of probation in the legal and conceptual contexts has been analysed by S.C. Raina (1996). The role and importance of observation homes for juveniles was shown by Usha Razdan (1995). James Vadackumchery (1998) discussed the interrelationship between crime, police, and correction. Treatment issues concerning adolescent abuse were discussed by B.P. Nirmala and Reddy N. Venkatswamy (1999). Muthuswamy (1999b) examined the functioning and efficacy of probation and prison administration. S.M. Diaz (1999) also analysed the probation system as part of social defence. There are typical legal problems relevant to women inmates. Padma Ghadia (2000) studied women prisoners in MP. Arvind Tiwari (2000a) found the prevalence of torture ranging from maltreatment to physical punishment in prisons. In another study (2000b), he observed that prison reforms in India have remained an unfinished task mainly because of the inadequate implementation of the recommendations that were made by various committees or commissions appointed from time to time by the Government of India. Jaytilak

#### 524 g.S. Bajpai

Guha Roy (2000) and Sankar Sen (2000) raised the issue of privatization of prisons. In her insightful book, *It's Always Possible*, Kiran Bedi (2003) explored the possibility of revamping the prisons by introducing correctional and rehabilitation programmes and improving the management of prisons. B.V.H.B. Sharma (2002) emphasized treatment as a way to react to crime and criminals. B.N. Choudhary (2002) discussed Indian prisons, prisoners, law and correctional processes. Nair (2001) analysed the legal aspects of prison administration.

# *Victimology*

Studies on victimology started gaining ground in India in the 1990s. Several aspects concerning victims of crimes received attention during this period.

S.P. Srivastava (1997) reflected on the theoretical and policy perspectives of victimology in India. D.R. Singh (1998) presented an overview of the growth of victimology in India. Sukumar Bose (2000) analysed the theoretical issues and assumptions of victimology. Manish Jain and Kamla Jain (2000) felt the need to reform existing laws so that crime victims are duly compensated. Bharat B. Das (2001) elucidated the position of crime victims in the system of criminal justice with special reference to compensation.

Studies addressing different kinds of victimization can be classified under following heads: (i) child victimization; (ii) Women victimization; (iii) Sexual violence; and (iv) Dowry-related victimization.

**Child Victimization.** The victimization of children in different contexts continued to receive greater attention during the survey period. Focussing on 167 boys and girls in Rajasthan, this enquiry concluded that the family environment, structural stress, and parents' subculture play a crucial role in this regard. Kakkar (1996) examined the relationship between child abuse and juvenile delinquency. Discussing several other aspects of child abuse like need for law reforms, Asha Bajpai (1996) discussed systemic factors. M.L. Nirmala and Sharmila Anand (1998) found that parents who abuse children have certain specific personality traits. They express a tendency towards extroversion and psychoticism. Abusive mothers express neuroticism. Some psycho-social aspects of turning a child into a prostitute were discussed in a paper by Kalpana Shukla and Mukta R. Rastogi (1999 ). The same problem has been adumbrated from the socio-legal perspective by M.N. Singh (1999).

There are scores of non-empirical studies offering suggestions on this theme. For example, Shrinivas Gupta (1995) dealt with various issues concerning child victimization and especially teenage pregnancy. G.S. Kewalramani (1996) studied the sexual victimization of children. The victimization of female children in folk songs (Punia et al. 1996) and the rights of the unborn child (Khan,1996) have also been studied. Other important papers relate to child sexual abuse (Gupta 1999; Jaswal 1997), victims of abuse of power (Tiwari 1997b), child prostitution (Kaur 2000; Singh 1999). Certain features of child victims and their problems were explored by Gupta and Chocklingam (2000). Issues with a victimological bearing were discussed in a paper by Sukumar Bose (2000). V.V. Devasia and Leelammo Devasia (1999) presented a human rights perspective in explaining the issues in victimology. Preetam Upadhyay and C.B. Tripathi (2000) analysed the social-epidemiological aspects of victims of homicides in Varanasi. S.S. Puri (2000) examined the law, procedure, and methods of investigation in cases of crimes against children, and suggested the need for comprehensive legislation to curb the problem. Child abuse as an organized crime was discussed by Chauhan (2000). Children continued to gain focus in victimological works in the post-2000 period. A set of papers pertaining to child abuse was brought out in the form of an edited book by Gupta et al. (2001). R. Thilagraj (2000), B. Devi Prasad (2001), Helen (2001), Mehta and Jaswal (2001), P.M. Nair (2001), and K.N. Gupta (2002) also dealt with juvenile victimization in different settings. Some studies on domestic violence may also be mentioned here. Shrivastava (1995), Kumar and Rani (1996b), and Mathur (1997) focused on various dimensions of domestic violence and victimization.

**Victimization of Women.** The category of the victimization of women received considerable attention in researches and publications. The activism of NGOs in matters related to the liberation of women, the setting-up of national/state-level commissions on women, and some extraordinary judicial pronouncements on the part of the higher judiciary have brought the issue of women's victimization into sharp focus.

K. Kumar and Punam Rani (1996b) portrayed the clash of social and legal perspectives in a study on offences against women. Doel Mukerjee (1997) studied the phenomenon of crime against women in the social and spatial context. Kudchedkar's book (1998) contained essays on rape, prostitution, domestic violence, child abuse, and foeticide. A study by J.K. Pattanaik and B.N. Chattoraj (1999) on violence against women analysed the problem in the context of the changing role of women. Sudharani Shrivastava (1999) inventoried the common forms of crime against women. Doyel Mukhopadhyay (2000) identified the comparative geographical properties of crime against women in the cities of Kolkata and Toronto. The work offered interesting findings pertaining to the concentration, diffusion, and perpetration of crime and a host of other factors distributed over space. Vadackumchery (2000b) reflected on the relationship between police, women, and gender justice.

**Sexual Violence.** S. Usharani (1995) studied the psychological correlates of rape victimization. Focussing upon 100 rape victims in Chennai and neighbouring districts, she showed that there is a negative correlation between rape trauma syndrome variables and situational comprehension. Sidharth Sharma (2002) highlighted the problem of rape under the garb of false promise of marriage and suggested the need for a change in the legal outlook. In a research study, Bajpai (2002c) found that the psychological consequences—like level of anxiety, adjustment, depression and self-concept—have undergone crucial changes. The study was based on 112 cases of rape in the rural and urban areas of Sagar district.

S. Sasi Rekha and R. Thilagraj (1999) reported the factors supporting the incidence of female infanticide in the rural areas of Tamil Nadu. The authors found the preference for sons over daughters and related superstitions as one of the factors in the perpetuation of the problem. M. Srinivasan (1996) studied 1,250 cases of infanticide and found that the practice was not much prevalent amongst SC/ ST groups; it was rather frequent in the Vannia and Gounder communities which do not belong to SC/ST groups. A similar study in Tamilnadu was conducted by Guruswamy (1999a). Victimization of women is also expressed in terms of wife-battering. R. Thilagraj and M.B. Pavitra (1999) found the changing extent and patterns of wife-battering in cases of working and non-working women. The nature, pattern, and context of sexual harassment of women in educational institutions have been studied by Asha Bajpai (1999).

There are also writings which though different from research studies, have an important bearing on the problem. Ram Ahuja (1998) delineated the emerging forms and varying patterns of violence in India. Kunal M. Parker (1998) used the term 'corporation of superior prostitute' in studying the Anglo-Indian legal conception of temple dancing girls from 1800 through to 1914. Mohanty (1998) outlined the victimological implications of rape victim cases. A coordinated approach involving all social institutions to alleviate the suffering of victims has been suggested in this work. Suruchi Pant (2001) talked about rape and the law in the context of society. Legal expositions coming into conflict with social norms and values was highlighted in this work. Indian society seems to be typically silent over the issue of domestic violence. The issue has only recently started getting attention. It is considered to be one of the most under-reported crimes in India. The reasons for this are now well known. A few works like those by Ashraf (1997), Nishi Mitra (1997), M.K. Roy (2000), Anjali Dave (2001), Subhash Chandra Singh (2001), Rajlakshmi Sriram (2001), Ranbir S. Bhatti and Tony Sam George (2001), Pattanaik (2001), Anjali Gandhi (2001), and Bhawna Verma ( 2002) have reported similar issues.

**Dowry-Related Victimization.** Theories explaining the incidence of dowry deaths were highlighted by M. Natrajan (1995). The consequences of dowry practices culminating in bride-burning were presented in a broader socio-legal context in a book by Umar Mohammad (1998). This work is devoted to identifying the causes and factors of the problem and strategies to control it. The findings of the study are based on 208 cases of bride-burning. Kusum (2003) looked into the issue of harassed husbands as an unexplored area.

**Other Cases of Victimization.** There are some more and mixed forms of victimization. For instance, victimization of aged people has recently acquired serious proportions. S.L. Tandon (2000a, 2001b) presented the case of older persons. A sample of 2,020 elderly persons was taken in this study to highlight several aspects of the problem. R. Thilagraj and M. Priyamvadha (2002) enquired into the various aspects of victimization of the age.

**Victim and Criminal Justice System.** Studies dealing with the problems encountered by victims of crime in the criminal justice process are of recent origin. Based on an empirical exercise, G.S. Bajpai (1997d) highlighted in his book, *Victims in the Criminal Justice Process: Perspectives on Police and Judiciary,* the problems faced by 300 crime victims (from Sagar, Jabalpur, and Bhopal in MP) in their interaction with the police, the prosecution, and the judiciary. Besides revealing that victims face scores of problems in this regard the study suggested a comprehensive blueprint for victim-assistance in India. In another stydy, Bajpai (1997c) suggested a model scheme for victim assistance in India. He stressed the need to consider victims of violence initially for interim compensation and later for state compensation through a structure specially created at state and district levels. The issue of non- reporting of criminal victimization is a core problem. Psychological factors contributing to victimization have been examined by Bibhu Prasad Rautray (2001). B.N. Choudhary (2002) discussed the rights of victims against terrorism and the criminal justice administration.

Let us also look at some other non-research publications on this issue.

The untoward experiences faced by the victims of crimes are highlighted by B.N. Patnaik (1997). Manish Jain and Kamla Jain (2000), as mentioned earlier, suggested reforms in laws to enable crime victims to get compensation. Bharat B. Das (2001) explained the position of crime victims in the criminal justice system with special reference to compensation. James Vadackumchery (2001) examined the role of police towards victims of crime. Shekhar (2003) found law enforcement officers to be victims of stress.

Victimological studies in India are largely characterized by the fact that they have increasingly applied Western theories and concepts in understanding Indian victiminology. In many cases, significant changes in the findings were observed.

#### *Juvenile Delinquency*

A study of the profile and background characteristics of inmates of juvenile homes was conducted by Harnath and Prasad (1995), in which vagrancy and children with no parental care were considered in the pre-delinquency stages. In his study on street children in Visakhapattnam, Sarvasiddi Harnath (1996) showed the role of various factors in the persistence of the problem. The role of police vis-à-vis juvenile delinquency has always been crucial. James Vadackumchery (1996b) discussed the bottlenecks in the enforcement of juvenile laws by the police. Arvind Tiwari (1998) took an overview of the functioning of the juvenile justice administration. A study on juvenile delinquency with an anthropological focus was conducted by Mir Shamsur Rahman (1999). Kanwal and Vidhu (1999) probed into the relationship between delinquency-proneness and the perception of parental childrearing practices. Based on 524 cases of delinquents, the study found significant differences in the areas of economic support, nutrition, clothes, puberty, health care, etc. The two variables had a significant relationship. Datta (1999) studied delinquent girls in Assam. Pushpa Kumari (2002) carried out a study on the status and circumstances of juvenile delinquency with special emphasis on juvenile courts and children's homes in Indore. Kaustabh Sharma (2000) did his study in Assam on the issues relating to juvenile delinquents and the role played by correctional institutions. Madan Dhondilsa Kanade (2002) adopted a psychological perspective in analysing the problem of juvenile delinquency. Sodipalli V. Sudhakar (1998–99) did a study on the socio-economic background of street children in the city of Visakhapattnam. Samta Rai (2003) felt that traditional approaches in combination with modern methods of treatment can help curb juvenile delinquency. Raval (2003) investigated juvenile delinquency in the frame of justice administration.

As the number of studies in this section reveals, there was a considerable decline (3.22 per cent) as compared to the previous survey.

#### *Human Rights*

It is not intended here to document all research relating to human rights. The studies bordering on criminological issues are proposed to be covered in this exercise. Human rights issues interfacing with the criminal justice administration have attracted considerable attention in the recent past. Human rights activism has been particularly directed against police in this country. This can be confirmed by looking at the scores of academic and popular writings published in the recent decades. The emergence of human rights publications in the social sciences and particularly in criminology was inspired by certain developments at the national level. The roots are traceable to terrorism and its handling by the police and the paramilitary forces. Human rights issues were raised during the terrorism phase in Punjab against the manner in which the police persecuted terrorists, suspects, and even innocents. Earlier, the Blue Star Operation in Amritsar and the anti-Sikh riots in Delhi and elsewhere, had thrown up several issues, bringing the high-handedness of the police and paramilitary forces to the centre of human rights activism. The credit also goes to the higher judiciary which took stock of the alleged excesses of police agencies in various regions. Pathbreaking judgments were delivered by the courts upholding the rights of the accused, suspects, and prisoners. The courts were particularly hard against torture, custodial maltreatment, and violations during the pre-trial phase. The issues relating to human rights became an area of research interest after the creation of the National Human Rights Commission which came down heavily on the perpetrators of violations and devised enforceable working guidelines in fragile situations. The commission also propagated the culture of human rights by encouraging academicians and voluntary agencies to undertake studies and seminars on the issues of human rights. Academic aggression was also expressed, in the form of writings against laws like TADA (Terrorists and Disruptive Activities Act) and POTA (Prevention of Terrorists Activities). The laws were revised, police practices were modified, and new pressure groups emerged on the scene. In addition, the UGC specially encouraged the introduction of educational programmes in human rights at the university level. As a result of all these measures, the post-1990 period witnessed a flood of publications in this area.

S.G. Chitnis (2002) explored the problem of terrorism affecting the human rights of the people. H.L. Gokhale (2002), J.K. Deosthale (2002), Mrunalini Fadnavis (2002), and Mishra (2002) discussed various aspects of terrorism in the context of human rights issues. R. Thilagraj (2002b) edited a number of papers pertaining to human rights in the context of administration of justice. Shikhar Sahai (2002) discussed terrorism in the context of human rights and the need to change laws to deal effectively with the problem. J.N. Gupta (2003) examined terrorism in the context of police and human rights.

As stated earlier, human rights issues assume critical significance in the context of policing. In fact, most publications of criminological interest come under this class. G.S. Bajpai (1995a) focused upon the nature of and remedies for crimes committed in police custody. His paper scanned the loopholes and limitations of the existing laws which hinder the successful prosecution of offenders in custodial crimes. The tendency of the police indulging in this form of deviance has been particularly discussed in this study. In another study, Bajpai (1995b) suggested the need to be realistic regarding human rights vis-à-vis their enforcement at the ground level. G.S. Bajwa (1995) made a study of the implementation and violations of human rights in different situations. Shriniwas Gupta (1995) wrote on the judicial attitudes towards the rights of the child. P.P.R. Nain and S.V. Joga Rao (1996) carried out an experiment to find out whether human rights sensitization could improve the efficiency of the police. James Vadackumchery (1996a, 1997, 2000a) wrote on various aspects concerning the police and human rights, as did Sammaih (1996). S.K. Singh (1996) discussed the problems associated with human rights violations. Similarly, Narottam Kumar (1996) analysed the problems faced by the police in the enforcement of human rights. Devasia (1998) talked of human rights in the perspective of social justice for women and their empowerment. Chockalingam (1998) highlighted the specific nature of the problems faced by victims of terrorism. Post-victimization effects and the need for assistance to victims have been stressed in this paper. The case of human rights violations in Assam has been studied by Abdul Quddais (1996). Alok Kumar Bose (1996) expressed concern over the constantly rising forms of torture. Bajpai (1997d) explained human rights law enforcement in the context of emerging challenges. In another study (1997a) he also developed a Human Rights Sensitization Programme for the police. G.C. Singhvi (1997) observed that custodial crimes can be prevented if the recommendations of various commissions/

committees appointed to look into the police issues are duly implemented. In a study conducted on 150 police officials, the author showed the areas requiring proper training in human rights matters. Arvind Tiwari (1997a) suggested ways and means to tackle child marriage. A rather new area of prisoners' rights has been discussed in a paper by Mrinmaya Choudhary (1997). The rights of children were enumerated and analysed by Arvind Tiwari (1997b). Why do the police turn brutal? Sen (1999) tried to find an answer for this malady. V.V. Devasia and Leelamma Devasia (1998) discussed issues relating to women in the contexts of human rights and social justice.

Scores of violations of human rights by the police tend to take place during police custody. Priti Saxena (1999) made an in-depth analysis of preventive detention. The human rights of children and women were critically examined by S.K. Pachauri (1999a, 1999b). R.K. Narasimhan (1999) adopted a social justice approach to human rights. G.S. Bajpai (2000) examined the incidence of 'informal arrest'. In a study of 65 arrestees, the author found that the role of legal provisions, police leadership, and the perceptions of police officials of human rights are crucial in the genesis of this kind of police behaviour. Makhan Singh (2000) investigated the incidence of custodial violence against suspects and arrested persons through a sample of 200 investigative police officials, and came to the conclusion that the main reasons behind the problem are fatigue, stress, and working conditions in the police organization. Girija Shankar Sharma (2000) identified the arrester's powers to arrest. G.S. Bajpai (2001) highlighted the reasons and scenario behind the slack and inadequate enforcement of laws relating to human rights. He took a police perspective to explain the practical problems coming in the way of effective human rights law enforcement. Geeta Gudilal (2001) made a study of torture in the international and national contexts. Scrutinizing the status of custodial jurisprudence, K.P. Singh (2001) observed that overemphasis on the human rights of accused and offenders—without arming the criminal justice system against its likely misuse under the cover of human rights—does not seem rational. P.S. Bawa (2001) made a critical assessment of the laws of arrest and emphasized the need to bring about a change in them. How far the police in Karnataka observe human rights has been reviewed by Kamalaxi Gangadhar Tadasad (2001). Women prisoners are deprived of several kinds of rights during their imprisonment. A broader approach to women prisoners and human rights has been adopted in a doctoral work by Arun Kumar (2002). A.C. Joshi (2002), probing human rights in criminal justice, observed that no reform was possible in criminal justice without appreciating the human rights dimension in it. Deepa Singh (2002b) carried out an extensive analysis of Human Rights violations in police custody. She (2002a) scanned the directives of courts requiring handcuffing in certain categories of offenders. Nirmal Azad (2002) also presented a case study on the same subject. Mukesh Kumar Chourasia (2003) critically reviewed police training in Madhya Pradesh. Fatima (2003) investigated various features of police atrocities and custodial violence. The same subject has also figured in a study by K.P. Singh (2003). Rajan (2003) focused on economics of crimes.

#### *Crime Prevention and Control*

Crime prevention is a major facet in criminological studies. It assumes several forms. It may be crime-specific. It may also be technique and methodologyspecific. The former is seen in case of drug addiction, juvenile delinquency, crime by women, victimization, etc. The latter is seen in cases of community-based initiatives, therapeutic and reformative exercises, community policing, etc. In India studies based on empirical data are very few and far in this field. A cursory look at trends in crime prevention studies makes it clear that crime prevention as a technique has not been fully utilized in India. There are several reasons for this lack of basic research in this area and the translation of ideas into practice. The police are not primarily a preventive institution. Consequently, there are hardly any takers for the idea of crime prevention proposed by criminologists. This underlines the hiatus that persists between criminologists and law enforcement agencies. Consequently, the utilization of research for policy purposes in India has been woefully meagre.

We may now take a look at studies on crime prevention in India.

Kumar and Stanley (1995) presented the issues of and problems in implementing and planning crime control. Pradeep V. Philip (1995) described Friends of Police (FOP), a form of community policing, who voluntarily extend active support and involve themselves with most police duties. This programme has achieved considerable success in Tamil Nadu. Probably the first systematic study on community policing was carried out by G.P. Joshi and G.S. Bajpai (1996) at the Bureau of Police Research and Development, New Delhi. Apart from analysing the conceptual dimensions, the study made an in-depth survey of some community policing programmes in the states of Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Karnataka, and Delhi. The study showed the need to develop and institutionalize practices of community policing within the structure of police administration at the district level. Preventive treatment and rehabilitation of 'drug-addicts'/'alcoholics' have been studied by many scholars. One such study (Patil 1995) evaluated, the various aspects of treatment and rehabilitation programmes for drug addicts in Goa. A similar study of the anti-alcohol movement in Kerala was conducted by Revi Anna Joseph (1995). Manju Mohan Mukherjee (1995) has suggested a model for a drug-free society. The efficacy and application of several measure of intervention to cure child abuse were discussed by Swapan Garain (1995). There exist a host of governmental and non-governmental initiatives to address problems of street children. A research report (D. R. Singh 1995b) evaluated the performance of such measures and pointed out the gaps requiring immediate attention. Urmil Sharma (1996) suggested the utilization of the knowledge and skills available in various disciplines in the prevention and control of drug abuse. Preeti Pande (1996) focussed on 250 releasers and abstainers to study their post-treatment and adjustment problems. The study revealed that abstainers increased with increasing age, with a large number of them being above 30 years of age. A case study by Deb (1997) on the modification of deviant children found that deviance in terms of stealing declined considerably after counselling, improvement in interpersonal relationships, vocational training, etc. Gokilvani (1999) wrote on the subject of rehabilitation of street children. Gupta and Gupta (1999) showed as to how various kinds of psychological interventions helped in the prevention and treatment of drug abuse. Studying suicide and its prevention and control, Mohanty (1999) found that family were conditions responsible for the rising rates of suicide. He found married people to be more prone to suicide. The role of community support in disaster management has been evaluated by T.G.L. Iyer (1999). N. Vithal (1999) analysed the reasons behind proneness to corruption and suggested measures to contain it.

S.M. Diaz (2000) emphasized the importance of crime prevention. The problems encountered by police in the investigation of thefts of motor vehicles have been highlighted by Sharda Prasad (2000). He also emphasized the need to undertake preventive measures. The papers by Bawa (2001) and N. Ashok Kumar (2000) discussed the police—people–interface. Sneh Lata Tandon (2001a) stressed the importance of self-help as a new mantra for empowerment. The struggle against domestic violence and the role of community-based initiatives were discussed in a paper by Nishi Mitra (2001). S.P. Singh (2001) studied community policing organized by the Rajasthan police. Upneet Lali (2001) suggested a partnership of key stake holders to prevent and rehabilitatie victims of crime. S.C. Agarawal (2001) also discussed community-policing measures to restore peace in society. A preventive prescription for substance-abuse among the youth has been suggested in a study by Usha S. Nayar (2002). K. Chockalingam (2002) wrote a critical essay on the past, present, and future of crime prevention in India. A proper planning of disaster management was suggested by Lalit Das (2002) to minimise the risk to 'as low as reasonably practicable' (ALARP). K.R. Shyam Sunder (2002) discussed his experiences with community policing. A. Abraham Kurian (2002) discussed the role of community policing in solving law and order problems. Taking the example of policing in Chicago, Mukesh Jain (2002) discussed alternative policing strategies which may work in India. A study of service delivery and reduction in cost of service was made by S.K. Rizu (2002). Rudra Kalyan (2002b) suggested measures against suicide strikes. Jayanta Mitra (2002) provided a view of cities afflicted by rising crime rates. The author emphasized the need to move from rhetoric to action for the formulation of an effective and programmatic approach to respond to crime in urban settings. K. Jaishankar and K. Chockalingam (2001) remarked that a proper analysis of crime patterns over a space can lead to meaningful conclusions for the use of effective policing.

The pioneering work done at the NIJ (National Institute of Justice) in the United States on GIS (Geographical Information System) applications and crime mapping can have useful applications in the Indian context. Jaishanker (2002) explored the possibilities of crime mapping in India. Gandhirajan, et al. (2002) created, with the help of Arc View software, a spatial database for gangs and their operations and concentration in Chennai city.

Puspesh Kumar and Yelne (2001) depicted the typology of women's resistance to violence. With the help of six case studies, the paper showed the resistance patterns of rural poor women. On the basis of their perceptions, the people can participate, make suggestions, and discuss the appropriate modes of crime prevention. Such ideas were expressed in a paper by S.L. Tandon (2003). Rashmi Mishra (2003) conducted a study on crime prevention in cases of SC/ST women in Orissa and stressed the need to improve the response of criminal justice towards them. Jaishankar (2003) suggested a new approach to community policing and crime prevention. Rajan (2003) discussed the economics of crime prevention.

#### *Legal and Other Interventions*

The studies discussed in this section focussed on the legal and other specific ways of crime prevention Rameshwar Balakrishna Pandit (1995) raised a legal debate and concern about cruelties against wives and their right to maintenance. S. Mehartaj Begum (1996) found the need to have stringent laws to curb the problem of the harassment of married women by husbands, in-laws, and other relatives. Anjali Gandhi (1997) examined the legal and procedural issues related to violence against women under sections 498A and 304B of the IPC (Indian Penal Code). A study on the same subject was also carried out by S.S. Goel (1997) who observed that recourse to legal action results in the breakdown of a relationship. Redressal centres have been suggested as alternatives. Shobha Saxena (1995) critically examined the role of protective laws in cases of crimes against women. She book suggested the revamping of criminal justice practices in favour of women and also stressed the need to introduce changes in laws. Chakrabarti (1998) adopted a legal approach in explaining domestic violence in the Indian setting. Kumar (1998) identified the jurisprudential foundations of gender justice with a human rights perspective in relation to crime against women.

K. Senthilathiban and K.V. Kaliappan (1999) stressed the need to have psychological services in this regard. The effects of post-victimization can be considerably alleviated with therapies and counselling. How does heroin addiction affect women addicts and non-addicts? A comparative study by Sadia Habib (1999), on a sample of 280 persons found that the two groups varied on superego strength and feelings of guilt, fear, inferiority, depression, etc. Panchel (1999) stressed the need to alert ourselves to solve the issue of sexual violence against women.

#### 534 g.S. Bajpai

Jaiprakash Nikhil Gupta (2001) suggested community collaboration for solving women's problems, such as women support cells to cater to victims. Lina Gonsalves (2001) presented a human rights perspective for tackling women's problems. P. Venugopal (2001) felt the need for women's empowerment in social, economic and political fields to restore gender justice. Mitra (2002) recommended that police take pre-emptive action in cases of dowry deaths. This empirical study analysed the variations of the incidence of dowry death in different segments of society. The work recommended improvement in education and the general empowerment of women. In her study, M. Priyamvadha (2002) found the majority of the respondents to be against women pornography and the vulgar display of women in the print and electronic media. It is necessary to develop a humanistic approach to victims of sexual violence and women need to be trained in self-defence. M. Tripathy and Mohanty Samarendra, (2002). S. Sanyal (2002) suggested education and social awakening as ways to curb the problem of domestic violence. Joshi (2002) advised a deep probe into the subtleties of this problem. Tandon (2003a, 2003b) also discussed ways and means to deal with the problem of domestic violence.

# **Conclusions**

From the survey of over 460 studies in the area of criminology, conducted over a period of more than two decades, some identifiable trends in the growth and development of this discipline become apparent. While specific trends and direction in criminology have been shown in the preceding section, the objective here is to present some broad conclusions which are based on the understanding achieved in the light of the present analysis.

- 1. The teaching of criminology at the degree and post-degree level is not extensively available as only a very few institutions provide teaching, research, or practices in criminology. This has resulted in many untoward outcomes. For instance, academic openings and a broad network of academicians in criminology could not grow in India.
- 2. Criminology in India has not been able to foster a clear-cut beneficiary base. Linkages between practice and profession in criminology are obscure and unexplored.
- 3. On account of being mainly associated with their parent disciplines, the researchers who made commendable contributions to criminology remained indifferent to the development of criminology in India.
- 4. The basic researches in criminology in India remain largely descriptive. They have not contributed to the development of theories explaining the major problems of criminality. Their contribution to policy formulation is still quite negligible.

 5. Combined together, criminology is largely perceived as a discipline with restricted avenues and limited vertical mobility in career advancement in India.

The foregoing account brings out certain factors crucial to the growth and development of criminology in India. Firstly, criminology is yet to emerge as a major independent discipline, though the subject is more than 50 years old in this country. Secondly, the subject initially grew as an adjunct to major social science disciplines,; still later it remained dependent on the academicians hailing from other parallel disciplines. Thirdly, the subject could not be instituted in many universities. Resultantly, trained manpower and students in this area were very few. Fourthly, this position has also restricted the possible employment avenues in this discipline. Hence the vicious circle continued. Fifthly, the teachers/faculty who were initially instrumental in the teaching and research in this area brought with them the concepts and methodologies of their parent disciplines. There were hardly any efforts to evolve a basic and foundational criminology with its own methodology. Sixthly, the syllabi of this subject in different institutions do not follow a standard pattern.

Moreover, the number of criminologists with basic orientation in terms of degree and affiliation in criminology is extremely small. A good amount of researches on criminological issues is conducted by sociologists, psychologists, and legal scholars. This position has both facilitated and impeded the growth of this subject. On the one hand, the process has resulted in making this subject a dynamic discipline with an interdisciplinary orientation, and on the other hand, criminology has failed to create its own identity as an independent and mainstream discipline. Scholars of sister subjects have invariably failed to connect their research on criminological topics with the prevailing criminological theories and concepts. Moreover, these scholars do not have any direct academic commitment to criminology as they have been conveniently vacillating conveniently between criminology and their parent discipline. This apart, researchers in criminology face considerable discouragement due to the difficult and daunting conditions for data collection which involve contacting criminals, prisoners, visiting jails, interviewing police personnel, and similar other problems.

## *Research Gaps*

A brief account of the research gaps as identified in the present survey is given below:

 1. Although there is a rising trend of studies in correction there remain significant research gaps. For instance, little is known about the impact of imprisonment, the prison subculture, prison violence, privatization of prisons, efficacy of prison personnel, etc.