**230 Breast-Feeding**

- Freedman, L. Z., & Ferguson, V. M. (1950). The question of painless childbirth in primitive cultures. *American Journal of Orthopsychiatry*, *20*(2), 363–372.
- Ginsburg, F., & Rapp, R. (1991). The politics of reproduction. *Annual Reviews in Anthropology*, *20*, 311–343.
- Ginsburg, F., & Rapp, R. (1999). Fetal reflections: Confessions of two feminist anthropologists as mutual informants. In L. M. Morgan & M. W. Michaels (Eds.), *Fetal subjects, feminist positions* (pp. 279–296). Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
- Handwerker, W. P. (Ed.). (1990). *Births and power. Social change and the politics of reproduction*. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
- Jeffery, R., & Jeffery, P. (1993). Traditional birth attendants in rural north India: The social organization of childbearing. In S. Lindenbaum & M. Lock (Eds.), *Knowledge, power & practice. The anthropology of medicine and everyday life* (pp. 7–32). Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Jordan, B. (1978). *Birth in four cultures: A crosscultural investigation of childbirth in Yucatan, Holland, Sweden and the United States*. Montreal: Eden Press.
- Jordan, B. (1993). *Birth in four cultures: A crosscultural investigation of childbirth in Yucatan, Holland, Sweden and the United States* (4th ed., revised and expanded by R. Davis-Floyd). Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press.
- Kaufert, P., & O'Neil, J. (1993). Analysis of a dialogue on risks in childbirth: Clinicians, epidemiologists, and Inuit women. In S. Lindenbaum & M. Lock (Eds.), *Knowledge, power & practice: The anthropology of medicine and everyday life* (pp. 32–55). Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Kay, M. (1982). *Anthropology of human birth*. Philadelphia, PA: F. A. Davis.
- Laderman, C. (1983). *Wives and midwives: Childbirth and nutrition in rural Malaysia*. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Layne, L. L. (1999). "I remember the day I shopped for your layette": Consumer goods, fetuses, and feminism in the context of pregnancy loss. In L. M. Morgan & M. W. Michaels (Eds.), *Fetal subjects, feminist positions* (pp. 251–279). Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
- MacCormack, C. (Ed.). (1994). *Ethnography of fertility and birth* (2nd ed.). Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press. (Original work published 1982.)

Malinowski, B. (1929). Practical anthropology. *Africa*, *2*(1), 22–38.

- Malinowski, B. (1932). *The sexual life of savages in northwestern Melanesia*. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
- Martin, E. (1987). *The woman in the body. A cultural analysis of reproduction*. Boston, MA: Beacon Press.
- McClain, C. S. (1975). Ethno-obstetrics in Ajijic. *Anthropological Quarterly*, *40*(1), 38–56.
- Montagu, M. F. A. (1949). Embryology from antiquity to the end of the 18th century. *Ciba Symposia*, *10*(4), 994–1008.
- Ram, K., & Jolly, M. (1998). Maternities and modernities. Colonial and postcolonial experiences in Asia and the Pacific. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
- Romalis, S. (Ed.). (1981). *Childbirth: Alternatives to medical control*. Austin: University of Texas Press.
- Rozario, S. (1998). The *dai* and the doctor: Discourses on women's reproductive health in rural Bangladesh. In K. Ram & M. Jolly (Eds.), *Maternities and modernities. Colonial and postcolonial experiences in Asia and the Pacific* (pp. 144–177). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Sargent, C. (1982). *The cultural context of therapeutic choice. Obstetrical care decisions among the Bariba of Benin*. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: D. Reidel.
- Sargent, C. (1989). *Maternity, medicine and power: Reproductive decisions in urban Benin*. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Sargent, C., & Stark, N. (1987). Surgical birth: Interpretations of cesarean delivery among private hospital patients and nursing staff. *Social Science and Medicine, 25*(12), 1269–1276.
- Trevathan, W. (1987). *Human birth: An evolutionary perspective*. New York: Aldine de Gruyter.
- Trevathan, W. (1996). An evolutionary perspective on authoritative knowledge about birth. In R. Davis-Floyd & C. Sargent (Eds.), *Childbirth and authoritative knowledge* (pp. 80–91). Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Whiteford, L., & Sharinus, M. (1988). Delayed accomplishments: Family formation among older first-time parents. In K. Michaelson (Ed.), *Childbirth in America* (pp. 239–253). South Hadley, MA: Bergin & Garvey.
- Whiting, J. W. M. (1964). Effects of climate on certain cultural practices. In W. Goodenough (Ed.), *Explorations in cultural anthropology* (pp. 511–545). New York: McGraw-Hill.

# **Breast-Feeding**

#### **Wenda R. Trevathan**

## **PHYSIOLOGICAL, CROSS SPECIES, AND EVOLUTIONARY PERSPECTIVE**

For most women in the world nursing an infant is such a routine and normal part of life that they would be surprised to see an entry for this activity in an encyclopedia. But as with similar life cycle phenomena such as pregnancy, childbirth, and puberty, breast-feeding for contemporary humans is never simply a biological phenomenon, but is typically embedded in a dense context of beliefs, values, and traditions.

#### **Physiological, Cross Species, and Evolutionary Perspective 231**

The physiological ability and requirement to nurse infants from mammary glands is, in fact, what defines us as mammals, members of the class Mammalia. Indeed, not all mammals have mammary glands (e.g., the monotremes who nurse their young, but do not have mammary glands) so this class might actually be better defined by noting that all members possess body hair, but it is mammary glands that catch our attention when we examine the characteristics of mammals. That, in itself, tells us something about the importance of breast-feeding to human observers who describe animal characteristics.

Two hormones are involved in breast-feeding: prolactin, which promotes milk production, and oxytocin, which enables the milk to move from the mammary glands into the infant's mouth. When an infant suckles, a signal is sent from the breast to the pituitary gland, which, in turn, stimulates the release of prolactin and oxytocin. Oxytocin is also involved in uterine repair after birth and in suppression of ovulation during the period of intense nursing, thus delaying the start of another pregnancy. Certainly the most important contribution of breastfeeding is nutritional, but breast milk also contains antibodies from the mother that protect the nursing infant from a number of pathogens to which it is exposed in the first few weeks of life.

Nutritionally, mammalian breast milk has coevolved with and is tailored to the physiological and growth needs of infants of each species. Furthermore, the content of milk is closely related to behavioral factors in the nursing relationship in a system that might be described as the "behavioral ecology of breastfeeding." For example, milk of most whale species is very high in fat (up to 50%), which is important for infant survival in cold waters. Mammals that leave their young in nests for long periods of time have milk that is high in fat and protein, whereas mammals that are in near-constant contact with their young have relatively dilute milk. Most primates, including humans, fit into this latter category, and are known as "on demand" feeders. Human milk, like that of apes and monkeys, is low in fat (4%) and protein (less than 2%) and unusually high in carbohydrates (more than 6%). Milk high in carbohydrates contributes to brain development, certainly an important feature for human infants whose brain size more than doubles in the first year of life. In fact, primate milk has a higher carbohydrate content than other mammalian species, a fact clearly related to the relatively large brains characteristic of primates.

Although high-quality breast milk substitutes are available today for those with the knowledge and financial means to use them correctly, the importance of breastfeeding in human prehistory and for mothers and infants in most cultures today cannot be overemphasized. There is no question that, under most conditions and in most parts of the world, breast-fed babies are healthier than their bottle-fed counterparts. In addition to the immunological protection afforded by mother's milk, breast-fed babies are less likely to be exposed to environmental pathogens associated with unclean water, unsterilized bottles, and other equipment used in infant feeding. Even later in life, children and adults who were breast-fed as infants seem to be protected from a number of health insults, including otitis media (earache), sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS), gastrointestinal illnesses, atherosclerosis, and some cancers (Anonymous, 1997). Furthermore, cognitive and motor skill development seem to proceed more rapidly in breast-fed infants, and children who were breast-fed as infants score higher on intelligence tests.

Also, as noted above, highly frequent nursing, especially when coupled with low caloric intake in the mother, usually leads to inhibition of ovulation in the first few months of nursing (Ellison, 2001). A longer birth interval is associated with lower infant mortality, providing another link between breast-feeding and child survival. Certainly in populations in which alternative means of birth control are absent or ineffective, nursing an infant enhances family and community health, as well. When examined statistically, populations in which breastfeeding is prolonged have longer birth intervals than those in which nursing is terminated soon after birth or not practiced at all.

Breast-feeding also seems to provide benefits for the mother. Nursing an infant soon after birth speeds a woman's recovery from the stresses of childbirth. Breast and ovarian cancer rates and osteoporosis are lower among women who breast-fed their infants. Certainly one can argue that having a healthy infant is advantageous to a mother's health, as well.

Breast milk is also much cheaper than milk substitutes when one considers financial costs. Regarding metabolic costs for the mother, however, milk production requires an additional 500 calories per day beyond what she would need for normal body maintenance and activities. For women who are marginally nourished, these additional calories may be difficult to come by. Furthermore, milk production is given high priority in a nursing woman's metabolic budget, so her own needs may be further compromised by lactation (Ellison, 2001). Because marginal nutrition for the mother is most often associated with poverty, a woman whose own nutritional needs are difficult to meet would likely find that her infant's needs were impossible to meet without breast milk. In fact, in economically impoverished populations, mother's milk may be the only healthful option for very young infants.

In most discussions of breast-feeding in industrialized nations the emphasis is placed upon the health of the mother and infant. In many parts of the world, however, breast-feeding involves the entire family or a community. For example, Katherine Dettwyler (1995a) reports that in Mali, nursing an infant reinforces the kinship relationship between a genetically related mother and infant and creates kinship bonds between unrelated people when a woman nurses an infant that is not her own. She notes that if a woman does not nurse her child, then it calls into question her kinship with the child.

### **INITIATION AND MAINTENANCE OF BREAST-FEEDING**

As noted above, breast-feeding a child is a somewhat predictable part of the life course for most women. That does not mean that initiation of nursing is routine and easy. Most populations also have cultural rules that women must follow during pregnancy to prepare for and ensure successful breast-feeding. These may include specific foods to eat or avoid, the wearing of special clothing and amulets, and other prescribed or restricted behaviors. Following birth, cultural practices relating to breast-feeding a child may include avoiding sexual relations, food restrictions, and performing ritual acts. Dana Raphael describes the tradition of the *doula*, a family member or friend whose primary role is to assist a new mother in breast-feeding her child (Raphael, 1973). Although the word itself is Greek and describes a person who assists women after childbirth ("mothering the mother"), the practice is found throughout the world, evidence that breast-feeding is not something that comes easily to every new mother.

One way of ensuring nursing success in a number of cultures is the custom of enforced inactivity and partial isolation of the mother and infant for periods up to 40 days following birth. In parts of Southeast Asia, this is often referred to as "roasting" the mother

(Laderman, 1983). During this time the mother and infant are kept warm, well fed, rested, and massaged. Although the primary goal of this resting period is recovery from childbirth, it also gives the mother time to initiate and establish breast-feeding before she has to return to her routine activities in the home and fields. Among the Ilocanos of the Philippines, a five-month period known as *tangad* includes a set of regulations that ensure sufficient milk supply and successful nursing (Nydegger & Nydegger, 1966). The most important of these are specific food recommendations and restrictions.

Another place where cultural practices come into play is in the initiation of breast-feeding after birth. In humans, a substance known as colostrum is secreted for the first two or three days following birth. Although colostrum is not nutrient-dense, it provides antibodies and other properties that enhance infant health during a particularly vulnerable period after birth. In many cultures, however, the colostrum is perceived to be inappropriate for infants and is discarded, meaning that the infant is not allowed access to the breast until the true milk comes in, often two or three days after birth. In the meantime, the infant may be fed water or another milk substitute. In contrast, a recent trend in North America is the emphasis on initiating breast-feeding as soon after birth as possible, in the belief that early nursing is positively associated with successful long-term nursing. To some extent, early nursing is important in that the hormonal changes at birth trigger milk production, but if suckling does not occur within a day or two of birth, production shuts down and it is very difficult to re-initiate lactation.

Much variation in the cultural patterning of breastfeeding is apparent in the ethnographic and medical literature. In some cultures, feeding an infant is truly "on demand" in that infants have access to the breast at all times of day and night. In others, including most Western nations, breast-feeding most commonly occurs in private and is more scheduled than spontaneous. Where infants do not sleep with their mothers, nursing through the night "on demand" is not easily achieved.

The most ancient breast-feeding pattern is likely that followed by our close primate relatives, one that permits the infant to nurse whenever he or she wants and for reasons that are not always nutritional. For example, monkey and chimpanzee infants have been observed latching on to their mothers' breasts when they are frightened or otherwise need comforting, even when no milk is taken in. At the opposite extreme is the "nurse every four

#### **Supplementation and Weaning 233**

hours" pattern formerly recommended by Western medical practitioners. In between are women in the vast majority of world cultures whose work patterns may dictate when breast-feeding can occur. In some settings a woman may carry her infant in a sling and continue working with little interruption when the infant nurses. In other settings, breast-feeding may be restricted to rest periods. Among the Gusii of Kenya, where women are involved in strenuous agricultural work, a young child is charged with carrying the infant to the fields with the nursing mother. When the infant cries, the child caretaker brings the infant to the mother for nursing (LeVine & LeVine, 1966).

#### **SUPPLEMENTATION AND WEANING**

In the West, medical specialists and lactation consultants recommend that infants who are exclusively breastfed receive iron supplements at six months of age. Human milk is low in iron, so by the time the infant is that age, anemia may occur if breast-feeding is not supplemented. This is the age that is most commonly cited for supplementation in other cultures as well (e.g., Minturn & Hitchcock, 1966). Food supplements may include a gruel made from a common grain such as rice or millet, cow's or goat's milk, or finely ground meat.

Just as there is variation in beliefs about breastfeeding, there is variation in beliefs about the timing and method of weaning. Commonly, an infant is weaned when the mother becomes aware of another pregnancy. Milk from a pregnant woman may be seen as dangerous for the nursing infant, or nursing may be seen as dangerous to the developing fetus. Women may choose to terminate breast-feeding in order to increase their fertility. In much of West Africa, sexual intercourse during the nursing period is believed to be dangerous to the infant, so women may choose to terminate breast-feeding to end the postpartum sex taboo and resume sexual relations with their partners.

One of the most common reasons given for termination of breast-feeding is "insufficient milk." Certainly there are rare instances when a woman is limited physiologically in her ability to produce sufficient milk for her infant, but under most circumstances, milk production is a supply-and-demand phenomenon, which means that the more an infant suckles, the more milk is produced. In fact, "insufficient milk" is often associated with food supplementation. If an infant is satiated because of other foods and liquids it is given, then it is less likely to suckle when placed at the mother's breast. If the infant suckles less, less milk is produced, and soon the mother finds that the infant is not getting sufficient nutrients from the breast alone and that food supplements are required to maintain a healthy weight. Thus begins a cycle that usually terminates with weaning from the breast and permanent transfer to infant foods other than breast milk.

The marketing of milk substitutes has had a profound effect on breast-feeding practices worldwide. Some women believe that canned or powdered milk is better for their infants and that, at the very least, they should supplement their breast-feeding with bottle feeding. As noted above, this often leads to "insufficient milk," and women find they cannot continue to nurse even if they want to. In some cases, particularly among urban populations, work in the public sector and breast-feeding are incompatible and infants may be weaned when a woman returns to work following childbirth. This is one of the most frequently cited reasons for terminating breast-feeding in the West.

Methods of weaning a child are highly variable across cultures. In some cases the child is said to wean himself or herself, choosing to nurse less and less often until complete cessation. When mothers take the lead in weaning, there is usually stress associated with the transition from breast to solid foods. Mothers may place bitter or pungent substances on their breasts to discourage nursing. For example, the !Kung woman Nisa recalls her mother putting a bitter paste on her breasts to discourage Nisa from nursing after she became pregnant again. Nisa was told that the milk was for the new baby and that it would make her sick if she continued to nurse (Shostak, 1981). Weaning is apparently quite traumatic for the !Kung, and several people that Shostak interviewed in her fieldwork had vivid memories of the unhappiness they experienced at that time. Among the !Kung and in other cultures, an older child may be shamed into terminating breast-feeding.

The Gusii believe that an infant should be nursed until it is walking well and is able to take care of other basic needs. Thus, weaning begins in the second year of life, although it may occur earlier if the mother becomes pregnant. The severity of the weaning process is illustrated by the word used, which means "to stamp on" or "step on" (LeVine & LeVine, 1966). Mothers may put noxious substances on their nipples, or they may actually hit the child who attempts to nurse once the weaning process begins. The child may even be sent to live with grandparents or may be given great quantities of solid food in order to decrease hunger.

As noted, cultural practices most often determine how long an infant should be breast-fed. Evolutionary anthropologists, however, have tackled the question of how long the human nursing period is expected to be when placed in an evolutionary and cross-species context. Four years is the most common figure cited for the nursing duration for our close relatives, chimpanzees, gorillas, orangutans, and for women in foraging societies. Other factors that have been used to assess the "natural" age of weaning in humans include life history variables such as adult body size, gestation length, and tooth eruption, all of which point to an approximate 4- or 5-year nursing period for humans (Dettwyler, 1995b). But no matter what criteria are used to estimate nursing length in humans, it is clearly much longer than the six months commonly reported in industrialized nations.

### **BREAST-FEEDING PRACTICES IN THE WEST**

In the United States, the number of mothers who chose to breast-feed their infants had declined by the middle part of the 20th century, with the decline being most rapid in the middle and upper classes, in association with the economic ability to purchase breast milk substitutes. By the end of World War II, most American women bottlefed their babies (Raphael, 1973). One of the factors behind the decrease in breast-feeding was active promotion of infant formula by food and drug manufacturing companies. Initially, promotion efforts were aimed at educated women in industrialized nations, but as the birth rate began to fall in the early 1960s, manufacturers turned to developing nations for their markets. Outraged at what were viewed as unethical marketing practices resulting in "commerciogenic malnutrition" in infants of developing nations, advocacy groups in Europe and North America began what has been called the most successful international boycott in history against Nestlé and other manufacturers of milk substitutes (Van Esterik, 1989). As a result of the boycott and publicity surrounding it, the World Health Organization produced the WHO/ UNICEF Code of Marketing for Breastmilk Substitutes in 1981. (The United States was the only member of the 122-nation World Health Assembly to vote against

the Code at the time, although the United States endorsed it in 1994.) The Code primarily encourages regulation of advertising and marketing, but it also encourages the provision of information about the benefits of breast-feeding.

The international boycott drew attention to breastfeeding at a time when American and European women were turning away from technological and medical ways of dealing with pregnancy, childbirth, and childcare. The result was a gradual increase in the numbers of women choosing to nurse their infants and by the second part of the century, natural childbirth and natural mothering began to come back in style, with middle- and upper-class women again taking the lead. By 1998, 64% of women breast-fed upon leaving the hospital, 29% were still breast-feeding at six months, and 16% at one year. The Healthy People 2010 Objectives for the Nation (United States) targets 75% at birth, 50% at 6 months, and 25% at one year (US Department of Health and Human Services, 2000). At all three points, African American women are far behind Hispanic and "White" women in meeting those targets.

In 1997 the American Academy of Pediatrics produced a policy statement promoting breast-feeding for all infants, including those born prematurely, and urged that nursing begin within the first hour after birth whenever possible. Furthermore, the Academy agreed that the infant be nursed whenever it shows signs of hunger and that breast-feeding should be exclusive for the first six months (Anonymous, 1997). This policy statement is followed by more than 100 scientific references in support of the view that "breast is best" for human infants. It seems that the pendulum of breast-feeding fashion has swung widely in the past 50 years.

Contemporary research on breast-feeding in the West emphasizes the importance of social support in promoting successful breast-feeding, not only through direct assistance with techniques for nursing an infant, but also through promotion of positive attitudes toward breast-feeding. The formation in 1956 in Chicago of a group of nursing mothers known as the La Leche League was a response to the need for social support for breastfeeding that was not being provided by the medical establishment. Today, La Leche League chapters are found all over the world and there are dozens of other organizations devoted to providing support to nursing mothers. Breastfeeding does not come easily to women in industrialized nations, as evidenced by hundreds of websites devoted to