## **Ross, Stephen**

The central focus of the work of Ross (1944–) has been to tease out the consequences of the assumption that all riskless arbitrage opportunities have already been exploited and none remain. The empirical relevance of the no arbitrage assumption is especially high in the area of financial markets for two simple reasons: there are many actors actively searching for arbitrage opportunities, and the exploitation of such opportunities is relatively costless. For finance, therefore, the principle of no arbitrage is not merely a convenient assumption that makes it possible to derive clean theoretical results but even more an idealization of observable empirical reality, and a characterization of the deep and simple structure underlying multifarious surface phenomena. For one whose habits of mind were initially shaped by the methods of natural science, specifically physics as taught by Richard Feynman (B.S. California Institute of Technology, 1965), finance seemed to be an area of economics where a truly scientific approach was possible.

It was exposure to the Black–Scholes option pricing theory, when Ross was starting his career as an assistant professor at the University of Pennsylvania, that first sparked his interest in the line of research that would occupy him for the rest of his life. If the apparently simple and eminently plausible assumption of no arbitrage could crack the problem of option pricing, perhaps it could crack other problems in finance as well. In short order, Ross produced what he later called the *fundamental theorem of asset pricing* [7, p. 101], which linked the absence of arbitrage with the existence of a positive linear pricing rule [12, 15] (*see* **Fundamental Theorem of Asset Pricing**).

Perhaps the most important practical implication of this theorem is that it is possible to price assets that are not yet traded simply by reference to the price of assets that are already traded, and to do so without the need to invoke any particular theory of asset pricing. This opened the possibility of creating new assets, such as options, that would in practical terms "complete" markets, and so help move the economy closer to the ideal efficient frontier characterized by Kenneth Arrow (*see* **Arrow, Kenneth**) as a complete set of markets for statecontingent securities [11]. Here, in the abstract, is arguably the vision that underlies the entire field of financial engineering.

The general existence of a linear pricing rule has further implications that Ross would later group together in what he called the *pricing rule representation theorem* [7, p. 104]. Most important for practical purposes is the existence of positive risk-neutral probabilities and an associated riskless rate of interest, a feature first noted in [4, 5]. It is this general feature that makes it possible to model option prices by treating the underlying stock price as a binomial random variable in discrete time, as first introduced by Cox *et al.* [6] in an approach that is now ubiquitous in industry practice. It is this same general feature that makes it possible to characterize asset prices generally as following a martingale under the equivalent martingale measure [9], a characterization that is also now routine in financial engineering practice.

What is most remarkable about these consequences of the no arbitrage point of view is how little economics has to do with it. Ross, a trained economist (Harvard, PhD, 1969), might well have built a rather different career, perhaps in the area of agency theory where he made one of the early seminal contributions [10], but once he found finance he never looked back. (His subsequent involvement in agency theory largely focused on financial intermediation in a world with no arbitrage, as in [14, 18].)

When Ross was starting his career, economists had already begun making inroads into finance, and one of the consequences was the Sharpe–Lintner capital asset pricing model (CAPM) (*see* **Modern Portfolio Theory**). Ross [16] reinterpreted the CAPM as a possible consequence of no arbitrage and then proposed his own arbitrage pricing theory [13] as a more general consequence that would be true whenever asset prices were generated by a linear factor model such as

$$R_i = E_i + \Sigma \beta_{ij} f_j + \varepsilon_i, \quad i = 1, \dots, n \qquad (1)$$

where *Ei* is the expected return on asset *i*, *fi* is an exogenous systematic factor, and *εi* is the random noise.

In such a world, it follows from no arbitrage that the expected return on asset *i*, in excess of the riskfree rate of return *r*, is equal to a linear combination of the factor loadings *βij* :

$$E_i - r = \Sigma \lambda_j \beta_{ij} \tag{2}$$

This is the APT generalization of the CAPM security market line that connects the mean–variance of the market (*rM* , *σM* ) to that of the risk-free asset (*r*, 0).

It also follows that the optimal portfolio choice for any agent can be characterized as a weighted sum of *n* mutual funds, one for each factor. This is the APT generalization of the CAPM two-fund separation theorem, and unlike CAPM it does not depend on any special assumptions about either utility functions or the stochastic processes driving asset returns. In a certain sense, it does not depend on economics.

We can understand the work of Cox *et al.* [1–3] as an attempt to connect the insights of no arbitrage back to economic "fundamentals". "In work on contingent claims analysis, such as option pricing, it is common, and to a first approximation reasonable, to insist only on a partial equilibrium between the prices of the primary and derivative assets. For something as fundamental as the rate of interest, however, a general equilibrium model is to be preferred" [1, p. 773]. They produce a general equilibrium model driven by a *k*-dimensional vector of state variables, but are forced to specialize the model considerably in order to achieve definite results for the dynamics of interest rates and the term structure. Here, more than anywhere else in Ross's wide-ranging work, we see the tension between the methodologies of economics and finance. It is this experience, one supposes, that lies behind his subsequent defense of the "isolated and eccentric tradition" that is unique to finance [17, p. 34]. The tradition to which he refers is the practice of approaching financial questions from the perspective of no arbitrage, without the apparatus of utility and production functions and without demand and supply.

Not content with having established the core principles and fundamental results of the no arbitrage approach to finance, Ross devoted his subsequent career to making sure that the significance and wide applicability of these results was appreciated by both academicians and practitioners. Toward that end, his own voluminous writings have been multiplied by the work of the many students whom he trained at the University of Pennsylvania, then Yale, and then MIT [8].

## **References**

- [1] Cox, J.C., Ingersoll Jr, J.E. & Ross, S. (1981). A reexamination of traditional hypotheses about the term structure of interest rates, *Journal of Finance* **36**(4), 769–799.
- [2] Cox, J.C., Ingersoll Jr, J.E. & Ross, S. (1985a). An intertemporal general equilibrium model of asset prices, *Econometrica* **53**(2), 363–384.
- [3] Cox, J.C., Ingersoll Jr, J.E. & Ross, S. (1985b). A theory of the term structure of interest rates, *Econometrica* **53**(2), 385–407.
- [4] Cox, J.C. & Ross, S.A. (1976a). The valuation of options for alternative stochastic processes, *Journal of Financial Economics* **3**, 145–166.
- [5] Cox, J.C. & Ross, S.A. (1976b). A survey of some new results in financial option pricing theory, *Journal of Finance* **31**(2), 383–402.
- [6] Cox, J.C., Ross, S.A. & Rubinstein, M. (1979). Option pricing: a simplified approach, *Journal of Financial Economics* **7**, 229–263.
- [7] Dybvig, P.H. & Ross, S.A. (1987). Arbitrage, in *New Palgrave, A Dictionary of Economics*, J. Eatwell, M. Milgate & P. Newman, eds, Macmillan, London, pp. 100–106.
- [8] Grinblatt, M. (ed) (2008). *Stephen A. Ross, Mentor: Influence Through Generations*, McGraw Hill, New York.
- [9] Harrison, J.M. & Kreps, D. (1979). Martingales and arbitrage in multiperiod securities markets, *Journal of Economic Theory* **20**(3), 381–408.
- [10] Ross, S.A. (1973). The economic theory of agency: the principal's problem, *American Economic Review* **63**(2), 134–139.
- [11] Ross, S.A. (1976a). Options and efficiency, *Quarterly Journal of Economics* **90**(1), 75–89.
- [12] Ross, S.A. (1976b). Return, risk, and arbitrage, in *Risk and Return in Finance*, I. Friend & J. Bicksler, eds, Ballinger, Cambridge, pp. 189–217.
- [13] Ross, S.A. (1976c). The Arbitrage theory of capital asset pricing, *Journal of Economic Theory* **13**, 341–360.
- [14] Ross, S.A. (1977). The determination of financial structure: the incentive-signalling approach, *Bell Journal of Economics* **8**(1), 23–40.
- [15] Ross, S.A. (1978b). A simple approach to the valuation of risky streams, *Journal of Business* **51**(3), 453–475.
- [16] Ross, S.A. (1982). On the general validity of the man-variance approach in large markets, in *Financial Economics: Essays in Honor of Paul Cootner*, W. Sharpe & P. Cootner, eds, Prentice-Hall.
- [17] Ross, S.A. (1987). The interrelations of finance and economics: theoretical perspectives, *American Economic Review* **77**(2), 29–34.