## **15 Conclusion**

Let us now look back at what has been described, as far as this was possible in the space of the previous pages. What actually happened, and why?

A great country, already in the process of industrialization, collapsed under the combined stress of social-economic change and a great war. Whether or not the outbreak of war at that time caused the downfall of Tsarism is not a matter into which it is fruitful to inquire. It collapsed. War and economic disorganization rendered impossible the task of the Provisional government, which was unable to make peace, to give free rein to peasant land-grabbing anarchy, or to control the urban mob. It lacked not only unity and political determination, but also legitimacy in the minds of the bulk of the citizens, whether army officers or simple peasants. Moderates were swept away; Lenin rode the storm, boldly using the peasant *jacquerie* to achieve power. There followed civil war, ruin, starvation.

Then the reconstruction and economic development of Russia proceeded, under Bolshevik leadership. Industrialization, therefore, was to be achieved, without capitalists, in a peasant country, under a government and party ruling dictatorially in the name of a small and, by 1921, largely exhausted and dispersed proletariat. The country would be economically and socially transformed *from above,* by the political leadership, by an active minority of party zealots mobilizing the still inert and ignorant mass, for its own good. Opposition to the leadership seemed to divert the people from the true path, known to those who understood historical processes, who had the sure compass of Marxism-Leninism to show the way to socialism and communism. The

party and government thus became the instrument of industrialization, of modernization. Dissent was not tolerated, the need for discipline stressed.

But the party and government were composed mostly of partially educated men, rapidly promoted, who learnt the methods of governing the hard way in the ruthless school of civil war. The relatively thin veneer of cosmopolitan intellectuals could provide only part of the necessary ruling stratum, and in any case they were by temperament better at discussion and clever polemics than they were at organizing the state or the economy. In due course both they and the more idealistic (or genuinely ideologically-orientated) of the old party members of workingclass origin were pushed away from the seats of power and ultimately liquidated almost to a man.

It is interesting to note that for many of the old party intellectuals (for instance, Preobrazhensky, Larin), as well as for the civil-war commissar type, NEP was a distasteful though necessary compromise; the market and economic laws were, if not dirty words, then part of the definition of what they were fighting against.

When the offensive was in fact resumed at the end of the twenties, Stalin had already achieved personal dominance and was placing in positions of leadership men more distinguished by ruthlessness in action than by any sort of cultural background, men whose Marxism-Leninism was a catechism, a card-index of quotations, used either with conscious cynicism or with blinkered sincerity, according to temperament. No doubt they all claimed to believe in communism, and some did.

In emphasizing in this way the personal factor, it is not in the least intended to adopt the 'struggle for power' interpretation of history, let alone of economic and social history. The types of people who provide leadership - not just the politbureau or the government,<sup>1</sup> but also officialdom as a whole - do deeply affect the way in which public affairs are run, and when most of the economy and social organization are within the public sector, this deeply affects them too. This is where both Russia's backwardness and her historical tradition are highly relevant: the degree of crude ignorance among a great many of the people is surpassed

only by the quality and devotion of the best of the intelligentsia and of the small idealistic group of skilled workers.

Bumptious, boorish and crude followers of Stalin actually carried out the leap forward, and possibly the ghost of Stalin would claim in extenuation that no other instrument was to hand.

The key problem, as Lenin had well understood, was that of the peasants. We have seen how Stalin and his henchmen dealt with it. Is this what Lenin had in mind when he spoke of the ultimate resumption of the advance? Did Lenin also envisage the ultracentralized command economy which emerged in the early thirties?

Lenin, as has been pointed out by many, was a unique mixture of the intellectual and the ruthless organizer. Where Martov, the Menshevik, had feared the cruel and ignorant peasant masses (denouncing *Pugachevshchina,* i.e. elemental risings like that of Pugachev against Catherine II) and hated terror, Lenin was willing to use both. But in respect of the peasants he seemed, at least in his last years, to harbour illusions. Even if world revolution did not rescue the Russian comrades from their dilemma, machinery would be the *deus ex machina,* so to speak. 'If we had 100,000 tractors .. . then the peasants would say: we are for communism.' This proved not to be the case. So, while Lenin would doubtless have sought to avoid typically Stalinist lies and brutalities, who knows what he, or Trotsky for that matter, would have done, faced with the realities of 1928? True, Lenin in his last years, and Trotsky in opposition inveighed against bureaucratic deformations. But how could change from above be achieved other than through a party-supervised or party-staffed bureaucracy? It is like blaming the typical defects of military organization on the existence of a general staff or ah officers' corps. (And are there not lessons to be learnt from the chaos which followed Mao Tse-tung's attempt to use the masses against party bureaucracy?)

Change from above, and in the direction of modernization, is well established in Russian historical tradition. It is not for nothing that Stalin ordered the glorification of Ivan the Terrible and Peter the Great. Many historians have made the point that it was lack of spontaneously functioning social forces, and of effective mercantile and (later) bourgeois groups, which compelled the state, in its own and the national interest, to substitute action from above for the weak initiatives of private persons. In doing so, of course, it snuffed out what initiative there was. In this respect Lenin was no exception. By the time he gained power private enterprise was developing rapidly, but it was still economically, socially, politically incapable of resisting either Tsarist despotism or its more determined and more ruthless successors.

Would Lenin have organized a 'command economy'? In the midst of civil war he certainly helped in the attempt to do so. Did he learn by experience that this was a disastrous error? A school of Soviet publicists claims that he did. They hold that, while expecting and hoping for a renewed offensive against Nepmen, i.e. against private enterprise, Lenin was against subordinating state enterprises and trusts to the centre in the Stalinist manner. or of wiping out *socialist* market forces.<sup>2</sup> This is a minority view. It cannot be either proved or disproved by the minutest study of Lenin's works. Clearly the 'leap forward' approach required stern centralization. But was the 'leap forward' required?

The period 1920-34 marked a great cataclysm, which shook the entire society of Russia to its foundations. It was then, facing a dramatic lowering of living standards in towns and coercion in the villages, that the security police secured the dominant place in society which they retained until Stalin's death. No doubt someone might object that the police were a key factor also in the twenties. The answer is: not nearly to the same extent. A Soviet novelist recalls how, in a rural area, 'the Eye whose task it was to be vigilant' used to sit quietly at the back of party bureau meetings. Then, gradually, he moved to the front row, and by the middle thirties he had his elbow on the table and glared at the frightened bureau members.

The atmosphere of terror affected the economy deeply. It was not only a matter of arbitrariness, it was the peculiar form that arbitrariness took: the fear of truthful reporting, the concentration of all effort on blind fulfilment of orders, the snuffing out of inconvenient ideas and of those who might be suspected of advocating them (plus their friends and relations for good measure). This meant not only that Stalin insisted on the incorrect

siting of some factory, but also that a petty party secretary in the depths of the Tambov province appointed plenipotentiaries to see that next year's selected seed grain was handed over to the state, so that no one could accuse him of softness in pursuit of the party's plan for *zagotovki* (procurements). It put heavy pressure on those whose job it was to provide statistics: if they spoke the truth they might be dismissed or even arrested, but if they were discovered to be lying they might also be dismissed or even arrested .. . Life was far from easy for managers, planners and officials generally. Stalin's capricious and hierarchically unpredictable methods involved everyone in risk and strain.

Yet in the midst of all this there were enthusiastic, young, talented organizers, who, along with scientists of the older generation, did do great things. Ordzhonikidze, until his suicide in 1937, was a hard-swearing, hard-drinking and inspiring leader of such men. Even Kaganovich in his trouble-shooting days was an efficient organizer. There were many others. Vast new industries were not created merely by threats. It must again be emphasized that we have been describing a system in which, despite the terror, many devoted people worked hard for the Cause, or for Russia, or even for their own advancement, but worked with a will.

One feature of the system as it emerged seldom appears in history books, but is surely of great social importance: the new men were remarkably indifferent to the welfare of the masses. Again, it is not just that Stalin imposed high investment targets or diverted brick supplies from house to factory building. Petty officials, managers, army officers, disregarded the most elementary needs of their subordinates to a degree almost past belief, in a country supposedly under a working-class dictatorship. The obverse of this is, of course, petty (and not so petty) privileges for the *nachaVstvo* (bosses). Under Gorbachev's *glasnost'* these privileges, unmentionable in the press for fifty years, came under scrutiny and open criticism. The contrast was made with what was available to ordinary citizens. The most elementary services and amenities were lacking - except for those entitled to use official facilities. Far less pleasant examples could be multiplied over and over again.

Why did this happen? Well, it is an illusion that men promoted from the ranks care for those left in the ranks. Sergeants are not noted for softness towards erstwhile associates. The fact that the revolution led to such social effects does not prove it was not a real people's revolution; on the contrary. Many of the more ambitious and energetic workers became *nachatstvo.* They tended to look down upon their more passive and unsuccessful fellows. Then, in the early thirties, came the great migration of unskilled peasants from the villages. They needed discipline. Acute observations about this were put by Koestler (in *Darkness at Noon)* into the mouth of his policeman, Gletkin. They had no notion of timekeeping, they were inefficient. In everyone's interest, they had to be compelled. And this was a time of great shortage. The men who ran things, who worked exceedingly hard, were entitled not to have to stand in queues. Therefore they had special privileges. Then it was all institutionalized, became a habit, a vested interest. And no protest from below was possible, because all organized opposition of any kind had become, by definition, treasonable.

That, of course, was part of the logic of a one-party state, and such a state was part of the logic of a communist regime ruling an overwhelmingly peasant country.

Economic historians should note the high cost of elimination of all opposition. By this is meant not only the human cost, in the diversion to camps of many millions, of whom a high proportion were above average in intelligence, energy and technical knowledge. Heavy losses were imposed by the mere feet that exaggerated and impossible plans could not be criticized, even by experts, lest they be suspected of deviation. This certainly contributed a great deal to the excesses of the 'leap forward' period, in industry and agriculture alike, and later also in China.

Russian historians and publicists have been considering whether there was an alternative to Stalinism. Was there a moderate, 'Bukharinist' strategy, which could have preserved NEP? Did the left opposition offer any alternative, or did Stalin 'steal its clothes' in 1928? (They never advocated anything as 'ultra-left' as the policies Stalin adopted.) Why did all the various potential oppositionists fail so totally, why did Stalin's line

triumph so easily? Was Stalinism a natural (or an unnatural) progeny of Leninism and of Marxism? Was Stalin the executor of Lenin's policies or the executioner of Lenin's comrades? (It could be both, of course.) The number of such publications multiplied under *glasnosf,* especially after 1987, when not only Bukharin's but also Trotsky's works could be published and discussed, by individuals of the most varied viewpoints. What if, given Russia's whole historical experience and the irreversible fact of revolution, there was in fact no alternative path for her? By this is not meant that any one act of cruelty or oppression was in some sense predestined, but rather that modernization from above, by crude and sometimes barbarous methods, was rendered highly probable by the circumstances of the time. Might not some, or many, of the excesses, stupidities, errors, be part of the *cost* of industrializing in this manner? Most of the deformations of Soviet planning could be observed in the war economies of Western states. It did not follow that the wars should have been run on free-market principles. In this case at least, it must be conceded that the errors and omissions inherent in bureaucratic centralization were an integral part of the cost of running a war economy, and in this case at least most people accept the cost as justified. Oskar Lange did describe the 'Stalin' economic system as 'a war economy *sui generis'.* 

For what is a rational way of organizing the rapid development of a backward country? What content can be given to the word 'rational'? Surely not the achievement of a purely economic optimum which, in any country, is rendered impossible by considerations of political feasibility and social circumstances. One cannot leave out of account the existence of classes and groups, the nature and qualities of the administrative machine, the ideology in the name of which the political leadership seeks to mobilize itself and the masses for the difficult task of changing society. Nor should the more purely military aspect be forgotten: to some extent Stalin really was engaged in building up the industrial base of a war economy in peacetime.

No doubt development economists will study Russian experience for many years. It abounds in lessons (and warnings) of the very greatest interest. They may well conclude that the political terror, the pace of economic development, the problem of capital accumulation and of the peasants were very intimately interconnected. A 'softer' economic policy would have given more scope for the consideration of specifically economic efficacy, required fewer sacrifices, and so weakened the arguments for full-scale police terror. But a sense of danger contributed to the decision to go all out, to industrialize very quickly, to concentrate on heavy industry at any cost. Nor can one overlook the fact that there was no precedent, that bitter lessons had to be learnt from experience, and that the Western economy was in sad disarray at the time when the 'leap forward' was being effected. There was no easy path. The one chosen was not the result of accident or personal whim.

Historians may also conclude that the system, whatever its original logic or rationale, had for some time (literally) outgrown itself. If they are Marxists, they may speak of productive forces coming into contradiction with productive relations, necessitating change in the direction of a market economy. The Soviet development model exercised considerable fascination. But many, including communists, who study its evolution, especially the key period which began in 1928, might well feel that somewhere in those years there was a wrong turning. And that no one should follow the trail blazed by Stalin, with its terrible sacrifices, unless some overriding set of circumstances makes other paths impracticable. It is said that one cannot make omelettes without breaking eggs. In that case, perhaps one should not make omelettes, if the menu happens to provide other choices. Perhaps it is Russia's tragedy that these choices were absent, and a measure of her achievement that, despite all that happened, so much has been built, and not a few cultural values preserved and handed on to a vastly more literate population.

In the previous edition of this book, I ended as follows: 'It will also be Russia's tragedy if, in the name of the preservation of "mature socialism", the ageing and conservative leadership continue to resist necessary change, since the resultant paralysis would have highly unpleasant consequences.'

In fact a number of observers took the view that the system was frozen, petrified, incapable of change. It is this which Gorbachev sought to disprove. Russian 'modernization' in the past has often been associated with the strengthening of unfreedom, with mobilization of society by an all-powerful state. So it was with Peter die Great ('Peter's methods were purely Bolshevik', wrote the philosopher Nikolai Berdyaev). So it was with Stalin. Such methods will not serve any more.

But, as we have seen, *perestroika*, *glasnost'* and *demokratizatsiya* have failed economically and have led to (or speeded up) the process of disintegration of the Soviet empire. And many Soviet Russian critics have concluded that Marx and Lenin were tragically mistaken, that 1017 was a national disaster, that millions of lives had been sacrificed in vain, thereby contributing to the party's demoralization and the collapse of the regime's legitimacy. This has been reflected in such symbolic change as the restoration of Russia's old tricolour flag, the renaming of old towns and streets (culminating in Leningrad becoming St Petersburg again), and in the felt need to drop the words 'soviet' and 'socialist'.

Was it then all in vain? Is the only solution to restore capitalism as quickly as possible, and (literally) bury Lenin? Socialism too? Or was the Soviet model, especially in its Stalinist version, a deformation of the socialist idea? An NKVD officer at the height of the purges is alleged to have said, 'If Marx fell into our hands, within a week we would have him confess he is an agent of Bismarck.' Was the Soviet system a new sort of class society, with the *nomenklatura* as a species of ruling class, its power based not on property but on rank, as I suggested in an article written over twenty years  $\text{ago}$ ?<sup>3</sup> And does the experience of recent years show that democratization and *glasnost'* have destroyed not only the Soviet empire but elementary order, without which a shift towards a market economy (or indeed the implementation of *any* policy) is impossible? No carrot if no whip?

One could also speculate on the close relationship of economic and political centralization, economic and political power. Whatever were its doctrinal or practical-empirical causes, the fact remains that the domination of the party-state made possible the centralization of economic control, which also was a precondition of the domination of the party-state machine, which controlled, allocated, employed, virtually everyone and everything. The 'command economy' required a command-polity. They rose together, they have fallen together. But neither a democratic legal order nor a market economy have replaced them, or at least not yet, and the auguries are not favourable.

Fortunately, it is not my task to adjudicate, and certainly not to forecast, especially as any forecast is very likely to be proved wrong before this edition reaches its readers. It remains to pronounce the death sentence: the Soviet system has expired, it has no more history as such. Whatever comes in its place will have a different designation, a different ideology, a totally different structure. And a quite different author to describe it.