# Chapter 3

# Tribes as Indigenous Peoples: Discourse and Adivasi Consciousness

The idea of characterising an 'indigenous people' in India has provoked of considerable debate in India today. This was not the case until a few years ago. Social workers, administrators, politicians, and even scholars used the term widely to refer to a certain category of people. They hardly felt any unease in using the native equivalent of this term, namely adivasi. Ghurye, who had some reservations about the use of such terms, employed the expression 'so-called aborigines'. Social workers, administrators, politicians, and scholars took the term, along with all its attendant prejudices, to the masses. That is how the notion of adivasi identity entered the consciousness of tribal people. The identity that was forced upon them from the outside precisely to mark their differences from the dominant community has now been internalized by the tribal people themselves. Not only has it become an important mark of social differentiation and identity assertion, it is also an important tool for the articulation of the demand for empowerment.

### Inadequacy of the Term Tribe

The Anthropological Survey of India under the 'People of India' project identifies 461 tribal communities in the country. These are enumerated as 67,583,800 people, constituting 8.08 per cent of the total population as per the 1991 census. The scheduled tribes constituted 6.94 per cent and 7.85 per cent of the population in 1971 and 1981 respectively. The question of the identity of tribes in India is closely linked with administrative and political considerations. Hence, there have been increasing demands by groups and communities for their inclusion in the list of scheduled tribes under the Constitution of India. That partly explains the steady increase in the proportion of the scheduled tribe population in India, especially in the

period between 1971 and 1981. Correspondingly, there has been more concern with the identification of tribes than with their definition. This assertion is not meant to convey the claim that lists have been drawn up without any prior conception of tribe whatsoever. That there did exist some idea is obvious from the criteria that were adopted, such as geographical isolation, simple technology, living conditions, general backwardness, animism, tribal language, and physical features. The problem, however, lay in the fact that the criteria were neither clearly formulated nor systematically applied. One set of criteria was used in one context and quite another set in another. The result is that the list includes groups and communities strikingly different from each other in respect of population size, level of technology, and other characteristics. Indian anthropologists have been acutely aware of a certain lack of fit between what their discipline defines as tribe and what they are obliged to describe as tribe. Yet they have continued with the use of this term.

The early ethnographers of India were not very clear in their minds about the distinction between caste and tribe in India. Eighteenth-century writings, for example, showed the synonymous use of the term tribe with caste. Later, it was even used in a cognate manner, as one can see in the use of the phrase 'castes and tribes of India' by Risley and many others in their writings. Efforts to make a distinction between the two terms began to be made after an attempt was made to collect detailed information about people for the census. The census officials were, however, far from clear about the criteria for the distinction. These criteria, however inadequate, are mentioned for the first time in the 1900 census. It defined tribes as those who practiced animism. In the subsequent censuses, animism was replaced by the category of tribal religion. Although the criterion was highly unsatisfactory, it continued to be used widely and extensively. It is only in the post-independence period that a more systematic effort was made to distinguish tribe from caste. Though the distinction between the terms was made in both colonial and postcolonial ethnography, the relation between the two was conceived differently in both periods. In colonial ethnography, the concern shown by British administrator–scholars was to mark off tribe from caste. Tribes were described as living in complete isolation from the rest of the population, and hence without any interaction with them. In

contrast, the main concern in Indian ethnography has been to show the close interaction of tribes with the larger society or civilization. Both Ghurye and Bose, for example, stressed the nature of the interaction between tribes and the larger Hindu society and the ways in which tribes have been drawn into Hindu society. Sinha (1958) even goes to the extent of viewing tribes as a dimension of the Little Tradition, which cannot be understood adequately unless it is seen in relation to the Great Tradition. Under such a conception, tribes have come to be studied primarily in relation to the features and characteristics of the larger society, the focus being on how tribes are being absorbed into the larger society, the so-called mainstream, by becoming caste, peasant, class, and so on. With such a conceptualization, the identity of the tribal group or community is indeed put at stake. We are, led to such a proposition or conclusion because of the way in which tribes have been conceptualized in the anthropological literature and the frame of reference in which tribal society in India is primarily studied.

A tribe is seen primarily as a stage and a type of society. It is a society that lacks the positive traits of modern society and thus constitutes a simple, illiterate, and backward society. As these features change on account of education, modern occupations, new technology, etc., a tribal society is no longer considered tribal. If the transformation is in the direction of caste society, then it is described as having become a caste society. If the reference is to peasantization, then it is posited as a peasant society. If the general direction of transformation is towards social differentiation, then it is described as a differentiated or stratified society, and thus ceases to be a tribal society. In the process, it is forgotten that a tribe, besides being a stage and a type of society, is also a society similar to any other kind of society, such as the Oriya or the Bengali. But it is precisely this that comes to be denied on account of the changed situation. It is true that tribes are not of the same stage and type as Bengali or Oriya society. There is, then, something clumsy about the use of the term tribe to describe the Indian social reality.

## The Concept of Indigenous Peoples

In the deliberations of the international agencies, the term indigenous people/population was used for the first time in 1957 in ILO Convention 107. It gained wide currency after 1993 with the declaration of that year as the International Year of the Indigenous People. The ILO convention 107 adopted in 1957 made a distinction between tribal and semi-tribal populations on the one hand and indigenous tribal populations on the other. The former were described as populations who were at a less advanced stage of development than those reached by other sections of national community and whose status is regulated wholly or partially by their own customs and traditions. The latter (indigenous) were, however, referred to as those categories of tribal or semi-tribal populations who traced their descent from the population which inhabited the country or a geographical region to which the country belongs at the time of conquest or colonization and which, irrespective of their legal, status live more in conformity with the social, economic and cultural institutions of that time than with institutions of the nation/country to which they belong (Daes 1996; ILO 1989; Roy Burman/undated). The ILO Convention 169 adopted in 1989 is substantively different in from those in Convention 107 in terms of conceptualization. To begin it speaks of with (1) tribal/indigenous peoples instead of tribal/indigenous populations and explicitly states their distinctiveness from other sections of the national community in the social, cultural and economic domains and (2) makes distinction between tribal peoples and peoples regarded as indigenous. In general, however, people, including scholars and activists, continue to use the term tribal along with indigenous.

Correspondingly, there has been a marked difference in the two conventions in their to general orientation towards tribal peoples. In 1957, the General Conference of the ILO adopted Convention concerning the protection and integration of indigenous and other tribal and semi-tribal populations in independent countries. The Convention framed general international standards for facilitating government actions towards protecting and promoting the progressive integration of these people into the respective national communities (ILO 1957). By 1985, the ILO felt the need to revise the convention on account of changes in attitudes and approaches towards these peoples world-wide. The ILO had earlier proposed integration as the desired objective but this was no longer seen as appropriate. This was so because the international organizations and an

increasing number of governments were moving toward greater recognition of the rights of indigenous and tribal peoples to retain their specific identities and to participate fully in the planning and execution of the activities affecting their way of life. Accordingly, the ILO adopted a revised Convention (No 169) in 1989 after the expert committee appointed by the ILO gave its recommendation and the same was passed in consultation with other international bodies. While the ILO was moving in the direction of revising Convention 107 on tribal and indigenous peoples, the Working Group on Indigenous Populations, set up in 1982 by the Sub-commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities of the Commission on Human Rights of the UNO, had already begun to employ the working definition of indigenous peoples developed in 1972 by Martinez Cobo, a Special Rapporteur of the UNO.

The definition was restated in 1986 by Cobo in his final report entitled 'Study of the Problem of Discrimination against Indigenous Populations', which reads as follows:

Indigenous communities, peoples and nations are those which, having a historical continuity with pre-invasion and pre-colonial societies that developed on their territories, consider themselves distinct from other sectors of the societies now prevailing in those territories, or parts of them. They form at present the non-dominant sector of society and are determined to preserve, develop and transmit to future generations their ancestral territories, and their ethnic identity, as the basis of their continued existence as peoples, in accordance with their own cultural patterns, social institutions and legal systems. (Daes 1996; Roy Burman undated).

The ILO Convention referred to above and the Working Group on Indigenous Populations set up by the Human Rights Commission of the UNO (Cobo Report) speak of the indigenous peoples/populations as follows: They are those tribal and semi-tribal peoples/populations regarded as having their descent from the peoples/populations which inhabited the country or the geographical region to which the country belongs, at the time of conquest or colonization. They are, in addition, also those who, irrespective of their legal status, live more in conformity with their own social, economic and cultural institutions than with the institution of the nation to which they belong. Thus, there are two aspects central to the conceptualization of indigenous peoples. First, the indigenous are those people who lived in the country to which they belong before colonization or conquest by people from outside the country or the geographical region.

Secondly, that the people govern their life more in terms of their own social, economic and the cultural institutions than the laws applicable to the society or the country at large. What is important here is that the notion of indigenous peoples, despite sharing attributes in common with the peoples described in ILO Convention 169 as the tribal peoples (in ILO Convention 107 as tribal and semi-tribal populations) is different from the latter in the sense that indigenous peoples are invariably marked out as distinct international entities. That is, the indigenous are invariably victims of conquest and colonization from outside. Furthermore, outsiders are easily identifiable. Being the descendants of the peoples who lived in their territory before conquest or colonization is the most important criterion towards definition of indigenous peoples, but it is not the only one. Other criteria include non-dominance or colonial situation, and living more in conformity with their own social, economic and cultural customs and traditions than the institutions of the country of which they now are part. In short, the context of the discourse on indigenous peoples, initiated by the ILO and later accepted by the UNO basically hinged on the twin concepts of 'need right' and 'power right' of a certain social category of people all over the world. This category of people was progressively being marginalized and dispossessed from their sources of livelihood and was vulnerable to cultural shock and loss of their collective identity.

# Tribes as Indigenous

The term indigenous people, though used more recently at the international level, has been in use in India for a long time. Social workers, missionaries, and political activists have been using the term adivasi, the indigenous term for indigenous people, freely to refer to tribal people since the beginning of the twentieth century. The term in conjunction with other related terms, such as aborigines and autochthones, has also been used extensively by scholars and administrators. It was used mainly as a mark of identification and differentiation, that is, to mark out a group of people different in physical features, language, religion, customs, social organization, etc. Even Ghurye who otherwise talks of tribes as backward Hindus, refers to them as aborigines. He writes:

When the history of [the] internal movements of peoples is not known, it is utterly unscientific to regard some tribe or the other as the original owner of the soil. It is possible to contend that

even if the tribes are not aborigines of the exact area they now occupy, they are the autochthones of India and to that extent they may be called the aborigines. (1963: 12).

Scholars used the term to refer to these groups without any apparent sense of unease. No effort whatsoever was made to dispel the myth associated with the term. Scholars, social workers, political activists, and administrators popularized the term along with all its concomitant prejudices (Sengupta 1988). It came to be used widely to refer to tribal people. Its use was hardly questioned, let alone debated. So long as it did not assume political dimensions, it remained an accepted term for the description and designation of a certain category of people.

It is only with the internationalization of the context, and the rights and privileges associated with it, that the use of the term indigenous has come to be critically examined, or even challenged, in the Indian context. The sense in which the term was used earlier and the sense in which it is used today are definitely not identical, though they overlap in some sense. Today, aspects of marginalization are built into the definition of indigenous people. Only those people who were subjected to domination and subjugation have come to constitute the category of indigenous people. Yet the use of the term adivasi (indigenous) to designate a certain category of people clearly reveals that these aspects were not altogether lost sight of. Even earlier the term had been used to describe people who were backward and cut off from the mainstream of civilization. The basic mark of differentiation was between those who were part of civilization and those who were not. Hence, the use of the term adivasi to describe tribal people seems to have some validity, even in the sense of marginalization. The requirement of historical antiquity may have been a more distant criterion, but the most immediate and proximate criterion seemed to be the fact that they were not part of civilization. In a certain sense, the aspect of marginalization was taken into consideration when designating a group adivasi. This is clear when we take into account other aspects of Indian society. The coming of the Aryans has invariably been taken as the decisive historical factor in determining the original people of India. Yet not all original peoples have been called indigenous peoples. The groups speaking languages belonging to the Dravidian linguistic stock have no doubt been considered the inhabitants of India since before the coming of the Aryans. Yet they have

never been described as the indigenous people, mainly because they do not constitute marginalized groups. The Government of India had, in fact, expressed no objection to the use of the term when the matter was considered by the ILO convention in 1957 and was tied to Covenant No. 107. This was because the term at the time had not come to be associated with issues such as minority empowerment and rights. Rather, it had pointed to the need for integrating the indigenous and tribal people into the larger social and political system. The focus shifted from integration to rights and empowerment by 1989. No sooner had the focus shifted than the argument was made that a category such as indigenous people did not hold up well in the Indian context.

## Arguments Against

Much of the discussion on the indigenous people/status of tribes in India has centred on the complex historical processes of the movement of various peoples and their settlement in the subcontinent. It is said that unlike in the Americas, Australia, and New Zealand, where identification of indigenous people is easier on account of the recent history of conquest, immigration, and colonization, the same is not the case in India. Rather, in India, movements of peoples of different languages, races, cultures, and religions date back over millennia. Even groups described as tribes have not been outside of this process. Given this, how far back should one go in history to determine who is a native and who an immigrant? Any demarcation is bound to be arbitrary and hence extremely contentious. This has indeed been the case, as we can see from the discussion below. It is also maintained that the communities described as tribes have been living in close interaction with non-tribal people for centuries, leading to a great deal of acculturation and even assimilation into the larger Hindu society. The Indian experience, it is stated, is different from that of the New World, which was marked by conquest, subjugation, and even genocide. It is hence argued that it is not only the point of departure that is problematic but also the nature of the Indian experience.

In India, the term indigenous people has generally come to be associated with the people described as tribes. It is assumed that they were the original settlers of what geographically constitutes India today, or at least were the

people who inhabited the region before the coming of the more dominant sections of Indian society, namely the Aryans. They are said to belong to racial stocks other than the Aryan and to speak a variety of dialects belonging presumably to two major linguistic families, namely the Dravidian and the Austric. The plausibility of groups speaking the Tibeto-Burman language is not altogether ruled out from the purview of the status of the original inhabitants in India. Ray (1973: 124–25) writes:

The communities of people of today whom the anthropologists call tribals, happen to be the indigenous, autochthonous (adivasis, adimjati) people of the land, in the sense that they had long been settled in different parts of the country before the Aryan-speaking peoples penetrated India to settle down first, in the Kabul and Indus valleys and then[,] within a millennium and [a] half, to spread out in slow stages, over large areas of the country and push their way of life and civilization over practically the entire area of the country along the plains and the river valleys.

The questions of central importance here are: (1) whether groups designated as tribes were natives of India and of non-tribe immigrants; and (2) if they were not natives, whether their settlement was prior to that of the arrival of the major social groups, namely the Aryans. Most scholars are of the view that the tribes could hardly make a legitimate claim to being native to India. They cite the observations of certain scholars, however conflicting these may be, in support of their position. Hutton (1931), for example, is of the view that only the Negritos may be considered the original inhabitants of India, although they do not have a marked presence now. He considers groups belonging to the Austric, Dravidian, and other categories as much outsiders as the Aryans. Guha (1944) is also cited for making a similar observation in the context of Austric-speaking people. But more authoritative sources on the basis of which such a claim has been questioned are the traditions of the tribes themselves. Dube (1977: 2) writes:

It is difficult to speak of 'original' inhabitants, for tribal traditions themselves make repeated mention of [the] migration of their ancestors. There is considerable evidence to suggest that several groups were pushed out of the areas where they were first settled and had to seek shelter elsewhere. And there are several groups, now absorbed in Hindu society, which can make an equally tenable claim to being original or, at any rate, very old inhabitants.

Two substantive points have been made here. The first is whether one can speak of tribes as the original people, especially in view of their migratory movements. This is indeed an important point and cannot be brushed aside. The second makes reference to the claims that may be made by groups that

have been absorbed into Hindu society. The latter suffers from two flaws. First, it is purely hypothetical. Second, the groups lose the right to make such a claim by virtue of their decision to be absorbed into dominant Hindu society.

If the issue of tribes as natives is questionable, is this also the case with the second issue? That is, are all tribal groups those who settled the territory before the coming of the Aryans, the assumed cut-off point for determining the status of indigenous people in India? Whereas this is more or less the case, this cannot be said with complete certainty for all the groups described as tribes in India. It is said that there are tribes in India, especially in the north-east, whose settlement in the territories where they live today is an even later development than the settlement of many non-tribes in other parts of India. The Nagas, for example, are said to have come to India around the middle of the first millennium BC, first to Tibet and later to the territory where they live now, a period later than the coming of the Aryans. The Mizos are said to have settled in the territory where they live now only in the sixteenth century. The settlement of the Kukis is considered an even later development than the settlement of the Mizos. In contrast to this, nontribal groups like the Bengalis, the Gujaratis, and the Oriyas have a much longer history of settlement than do the tribes referred to above. It is indeed problematic to say, then, that all tribal people in India were earlier settlers than the Aryans, and that, therefore, tribes are indigenous and non-tribes are non-indigenous. Yet in the context of the argument made, there is a need to make a distinction between settlement in the context of a country (India being the reference point here) as a whole and settlement within its parts or regions. In the discourse on indigenous people, these two aspects are either ignored, mixed or even interchanged. Correspondingly, the argument either in defence or against the proposition is valid at one level. For example, at the local level, it is often used to substantiate the argument at another level, namely the country as a whole. The Santhals may have settled in the territory where they live now, namely the Santhal Parganas or areas adjacent to it, at the beginning of the nineteenth century. They may have even settled there later than the Bengalis. But that in no way rules out the fact that their settlement in India is prior to that of the Aryans, including the Bengalis. Conversely, the settlement of the Mizos in the country called

India may have been a later development than the settlement of the Gujaratis or the Bengalis, but the fact remains that they were the original settlers of the place where they now live.

It needs to be mentioned here that tribal groups in India do not consist solely of groups speaking the Dravidian and Austro-Asiatic languages. A very large number of tribal groups, in fact, belong to the Tibeto-Burmanlanguage-speaking group, many of whom can hardly be considered indigenous if the arrival of the Aryans is taken as the cut-off mark to decide who is indigenous and who is not. To restrict the term indigenous to only those groups that entered the subcontinent prior to the arrival of the Indo-Aryans would mean excluding many tribal groups of the Tibeto-Burmanlanguage-speaking family from the status of indigenous people. There are also tribal groups like the Bhils who speak languages of the Indo-Aryan family. This poses the problem of their identification as indigenous people. Yet it is generally held that tribal groups have adopted the languages they speak through the processes of interaction and acculturation with Indo-Aryan-speaking groups. In terms of their cultural and physical features, they are, however, still considered different from the Indo-Aryan population (Hermanns 1957: 23). The fact that they speak a language belonging to the Indo-Aryan group is attributed to the acculturation process resulting from contact between the Bhils and the Aryans. What this means is that people identified and described as tribals should not necessarily be treated as indigenous and that there are tribal groups that could be treated as indigenous and others that could not. In contrast, many groups and communities, especially those belonging to the Dravidian-languagespeaking group such as Tamilians, the Telugus, and the Malayalis, could stake a claim to being indigenous by virtue of the fact that they were inhabitants of India prior to the coming of the Aryans. They are, however, not recognized as tribals, and share few attributes in common with the tribals, who stand dispossessed, exploited, and marginalized. Such is not the case with the groups referred to above. Rather, they constitute a part of the dominant national community. In terms of other criteria for indigenous people, status, namely marginalized status, loss of control over resources, etc., they can hardly be considered eligible. The congruence between the term and the concept on the basis of which tribal activists defend the

application of the term does not stand valid in all situations. There is another point that needs to be made in this context. The description of groups and communities as indigenous on the basis of the language usage raises another problem. There are many tribal groups that speak languages of the Indo-Aryan group. This poses the problem of identification of the groups concerned as indigenous people. These groups may have adopted these languages through the processes of interaction and acculturation with groups already speaking these languages. Yet this does not at all contradict the other fact that the present aborigines are completely different in terms of their ethnicity and culture from modern Aryans. Rather, it confirms the clear distinctions that have been made between them for centuries. There is still another ground on which the indigenous claim is contested in the Indian context. It is generally held that Indian society is made up of a number of castes and groups, and that many of these are the result of a process of fusion of various groups and communities, including tribes. In view of this, it becomes extremely difficult to reconcile the claim that a segment of one community can be identified as indigenous and another as non-indigenous.

### In Defence

The extension of the term is, however, strongly defended by activists and scholars, both tribal and non-tribal. This is done not so much on the basis of original settlement as on some other consideration. They, of course, trace the history of tribals in India much before the coming of the Aryan people. They also argue that tribals, whose ancestors lived here for thousands of years prior to the Aryan invasion—a fact that can hardly be disputed should be considered indigenous people, so that certain positive international instruments can be made applicable to these marginalized and deprived social groups. But the case is made more forcefully on other grounds. Pathy (1992a: 8), for example, writes that tribals have been victims of conquest and colonization, and hence share all the attributes of colonized people, such as ethnic identity, loss of control over customary territorial resources, cultural annihilation, and powerlessness. He makes this case despite recognizing the fact that the claim of original settlement in a territory is problematic and unreasonable. But the issues of colonization and

colonized status remain far from being resolved. First, we do not have detailed and well-researched historical evidence on the nature of the relations or encounters between groups designated as indigenous and other social groups for the period preceding the coming of the British, which would allow us to draw firm conclusions about the nature of relations between the two types of social groups. In general, the relation between tribes and non-tribes has been described as one of mutual coexistence rather than one of subjugation and domination, at least until the advent of British rule. This is the other important ground on which the term indigenous people has been adopted in the Indian context. It is said that most studies on the history of Indian civilization depict the growth and expansion of Hindu society as a prolonged and complex process of assimilation. The nature of the interaction between tribals and non-tribals has been broadly described as one of peaceful coexistence rather than one of conquest and subjugation (Bose 1941; Béteille 1998: 189). This has also been endorsed by a scholar who otherwise talks of an aggressive absorption of tribals into Hindu society with the onset of colonial rule (Desai 1977: 24). Pathy (1992b: 51) speaks elsewhere of a symbiotic relationship between tribals and non-tribals rather that a relationship based on colonization and conquest. He writes, 'Majority of the so-called tribals of India had developed [a] class structure over a long period of time and therefore had interactions with the other communities. Up to the time of colonialism, it was largely not a relationship of domination and subjugation.' Not only is the question of original settlement in a territory problematic, so are the questions of colonization and subjugation, as one can see from Pathy's observation. This means that the question of indigenous people could only be raised from the period of the arrival of the British in India and the subsequent processes of colonization and subjugation. If these processes are taken as the point of departure for the determination of indigenous people status, then the issue of original settlement so central to the notion of indigenous people, in fact, becomes redundant.

In fact, the whole exercise of the identification of groups and communities as tribes during the colonial period was to a great extent contingent upon the nature of the relations that the tribes had with the larger society. This factor seems to have been accepted without much deliberation

or debate as an important consideration in the identification of tribes in India. By and large, tribes were considered as those groups that were outside civilization. This means that they not only remained outside the politico-administrative structure of the larger society or the kingdom, but also outside the general social organization and world-view of the larger society. In short, they continued to be distinct because they escaped colonization and subjugation. Where people were subjugated, they became a part of the larger social organization and failed to maintain their distinctiveness. That they lived on hills and plateaus or in forests, and survived on hunting and food-gathering or practiced slash-and-burn agriculture, followed from being out of the civilization complex. Emphasizing this point, Béteille (1986: 316) writes that where tribe and civilization coexist, as in India and in the Islamic world, being a tribe has been more a matter of remaining outside of state and civilization, whether by choice or necessity, than of reaching a definite stage in the evolutionary advance from the simple to the complex. The Indian practice of regarding tribes as a large assortment of communities, differing widely in size, mode of livelihood, and social organization, cannot, therefore, be dismissed as anomalous. They are all tribes because they all stood more or less outside of Hindu civilization, and not because they were all at exactly at the same stage of evolution. In short, they are described as tribes, and hence even as indigenous people, because they escaped the processes of colonization and subjugation.

The use of the term indigenous people to refer to tribal people is defended on yet another ground. It is argued by some scholars that unlike antagonists. Who tend to take note of only historical realism, we have also to take note of critical realism. They state that irrespective of the place and time of origin or occupation of the present habitat in India, there are certain communities which until recently maintained practically autogenous sources of legitimization of cultural and social processes, which followed an ideology of a self-regulated economy, and which had only marginal interaction with external political structures. Their indigenous identity cannot be brushed aside by the juxtaposition of non-meaningful occurrences in space and time in systemic terms (Roy Burman 1992: 24). Such a claim is difficult to establish today. Not only had tribal communities been brought

under uniform administrative and legal structures under the British, they had also been drawn into the politico-economic processes of the larger society, especially in the post-independence period. Very few tribes have managed to escape such processes. The empirical reality is far too complex. It is not at all surprising, then, that elsewhere Roy Burman (1983: 1172–74) writes, 'Even many of those with the simplest technology were integrated with the wider society.' In short, the use of the term indigenous to describe tribal people in India is fraught with many difficulties. It is less reflective of the empirical reality, being more in the nature of a political construction.

Though the question of indigenous people has been discussed generally in the context of India as a whole, the discussion has taken place in relation to different regions and territories within the country. There have been so many migrations in and out of the subcontinent over the centuries that no particular jati can have genuine grounds for making such a claim (Béteille 1998: 189; Hardiman 1987: 15–16). In any discussion of indigenous people in India, it is important that we do not mix problems obtaining at two levels. Often, the problem at the level of the country is used to make a case against tribes being indigenous at the regional or local levels, and vice versa. Posing the question of tribes as indigenous people in relation to territories within the country gives rise to problems of a somewhat different nature. The movement of people belonging to different races, ethnicities, and linguistic groups, including those described as tribals, from one place to another is something that has been taking place in India for centuries. Groups that may be indigenous with respect to the country as a whole may not be indigenous with respect to their settlement in a given territory. It may also happen, as is usually the case, that the same group may be indigenous and not indigenous at the same time. The Oraons, the Mundas, and many other tribes living in Jharkhand, for example, may have a legitimate claim to be called indigenous people in respect of their settlement in the country called India prior to the arrival of the Aryans, or even in respect of their settlement in Jharkhand, but it is not certain if they can claim to be indigenous in Assam and Bengal, areas into which they moved during the course of the last century or so. Indeed, their claim to being indigenous is strongly contested in these places. Nowhere is this more true than in Assam where the migrant tribals' claim to be the indigenous people is disputed by

tribal communities such as the Bodos and the Mishings, who have a much longer history of settlement in the region than the tribals from Bihar, Orissa, Madhya Pradesh, etc. If, however, one takes India as a whole, then these migrant groups have a much longer history of settlement than the tribes in the north-eastern region. The tribals from this region have also moved in large numbers to the Andaman Islands and have settled there as cultivators after reclaiming land from the forest, and in the process dispossessed the native Jarvas from their territories. Thus, the Oraons, the Mundas, and others are indigenous in some context, that is, in the context of their claim to have lived in India before the Aryan invasion, and also in the context of their being the first settlers of Jharkhand. Their claim to be indigenous, however, is disputed in places outside the Jharkhand region.

## Adivasi Consciousness

In the context of India as a whole, then, the determination of indigenous peoples is indeed problematic. The problem, as mentioned earlier, is said to emanate from the fact that population movements and experiences in India have been different from those in the New World. There is another difference, which has not been adequately highlighted. It is true that the movement of population even in the New World has been similar to the one in India—of different races characterized by different languages, origins, religions, cultures, etc. In the New World, however, these groups did not come to establish or have special relations with a given territory or region in the course of their movement. In India, on the other hand, population movements were somewhat different. Here different communities came to develop a distinct and definite association with certain territories in the course of their movement. Whether those especially associated with a given territory are indigenous to the territory or land in which they live is a question that will always be contested. However, what remains uncontested is the fact that they have developed special relations with the territory in question. The communities in question considered these territories as their own against the claims of other communities. They considered themselves as having prior and preferential, if not exclusive, rights over the territory in which they lived, either on account of their prior historical settlement or their numerical dominance. Following this, they sought to promote and

protect the interest and welfare of their community and to demand special rights and privileges. These aspirations led to the desire to have a state of their own. Having articulated this demand, they sought to promote the interests of their community through state patronage. The people living in their respective territories have thus come to see the states to which they belong as the culmination of the yearning of the residents of a particular territory to have a homeland of their own. This indicates recognition of the fact, implicit though it may be, that certain people have prior rights over others in the territory that they occupy. This is almost like saying that they are the original inhabitants of the territory that they inhabit. It is, therefore, not a coincidence that the dominant communities hardly feel the need to articulate issues along the lines of indigenous versus non-indigenous people. By virtue of the fact that they have states of their own, and hence territories too, they take the matter for granted. The issue surfaces only when they feel threatened by the movement of people from outside the community. They fear either the increasing numbers of outsiders or the loss of control of power, both economic and political. Nowhere is this close identification with land or territory more clearly manifested than in the sonof-the-soil theory, raised from time to time by the dominant regional communities in India. In short, people speaking different languages, possessing different physical features, following different cultures, and observing different modes of social organization, identify and relate themselves in a special way with a given territory or region. Attempts to theorize such developments in India have been made. In doing so, scholars have invariably made use of concepts such as nation and nationality. The element of territoriality assumes a central place in both these concepts.

Paradoxically, whereas such privileges and rights are freely recognized with respect to these communities, the same is denied to tribal communities in India. In the process, they are being dispossessed of their control over resources (land, forest, water, minerals) in their own territory and are being subjected increasingly to misery, injustice, and exploitation. If their status as the indigenous people of India is problematic—and the problem indeed is both empirical and conceptual—the least that the dominant regional communities could do is to recognize the rights and privileges of these people in the territories and regions they inhabit.

In the absence of such powers and rights, a new form of identity, namely the identity of adivasis or indigenous people, is crystallizing among tribes in different parts of India. The term, adopted mainly as a point of reference or description, has today become an important marker of identity articulation and assertion. As noted earlier, the designation or description of tribes as indigenous people was not the result of self-identification or selfdescription by the tribal people themselves. It was not part of the attempts at positive self-identification and self-evaluation by the tribes. Rather, the term was used by outsiders to describe the tribes. The identity imposed by outsiders has been accepted and internalized by the tribes. It is an important marker of identity and consciousness, which evokes a sense of self-esteem and pride rather than a sense of inferiority and shame, feelings that often accompany terms like tribe and tribal. Tribal people now use it to identify and define themselves. It is on the basis of adivasi identity that tribes are increasingly differentiating themselves from non-tribes, at least at the grassroots level. The declaration of 1993 as the International Year of the World's Indigenous People has sharpened this identity, for this identity has now come to carry certain rights and privileges with it.

Further, the identity being expressed through the term adivasi is indeed an expanded one, cutting across tribes bearing different names and speaking different languages or dialects. It also goes beyond the groups and communities, or a part thereof, listed in the Constitution. It should be noted that there is an important gap in the sense in which the term tribe is used and understood by tribal people and the sense in which it is understood by others, especially administrators, lawyers, and academicians. For the latter, communities are tribes only if they are listed in the Constitution. Tribes, on the other hand, do not view themselves in the sense of constituting a politico-administrative category. Rather, they view themselves in the sense of belonging to the same community, irrespective of whether a group, or a segment of it, is listed or not listed in the Constitution. By virtue of this bond of emotion, they are also adivasis or indigenous people, though the Constitution does not recognize them as tribes.

In many parts of the country, the category had taken on political overtones. In Chhotanagpur, for example, as early as 1939, it assumed the form of a demand for a separate state for the adivasis. The Adivasi

Mahasabha, the organization formed to spearhead this movement, drew its inspiration from being described as the representative of the original people. Such political overtones are not confined to Chhotanagpur alone. The movement has spread to other parts of India as well, particularly the tribal regions of central and western India, such as Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, and Rajasthan. This has led to the emergence of many organizations at the local and regional levels articulating tribal demands along the lines of the status of indigenous people. Some organizations are even actively articulating the demands of the indigenous people at the national and international levels.

Adivasi consciousness and the demand for indigenous people status are not so much about the claim to being the original inhabitants of India as about the fact that the tribals have no power whatsoever over the resources (land, forest, river, minerals) in the territory in which they live. This despite the fact that they are prior inhabitants of India in relation to other groups. Adivasi consciousness and the articulation of political demands are basically expressions of a yearning for a special relation with the territory in which they live. It is the same kind of yearning that various dominant communities in India articulated in the period before and after independence. This is seen clearly if one maps the tribes and regions where such a sentiment is strongly articulated. This identity is more strongly articulated in central, western, and southern India than in north-eastern India. The reason why this articulation of tribal identity is weak in the north-east is because people here exercise some power over the territories in which they live. The scenario is just the opposite in other parts of tribal India. This indicates that the assertion of such an identity is stronger where there is a greater degree of marginalization and powerlessness.

There are, however, differences in the way that this new identity is being conceptualized at different levels. Social workers, administrators, scholars, and social scientists have generally used the term in the sense of only the original inhabitants. Adivasi ideologues too primarily use this term in the sense of original settlement, as this was the sense in which outsiders described tribal people. The aspect of marginalized status that evolved in the course of history has now been added to the meaning of the term. Others, especially radical scholars, see it only in relation to a particular historical development, namely the subjugation during the nineteenth

century of various communities that before the colonial period had been free, or at least relatively free, of the control of outside states. This process, it is argued, was accompanied by an influx of traders, moneylenders, and landlords, who established themselves under the protection of the colonial authorities and took advantage of the new judicial system to deprive the adivasis of large tracts of land. Adivasis are hence defined as groups that shared a common fate in the nineteenth century, and which, as a result of this experience, have evolved a collective identity, that is, an identity of being adivasis. This is not meant to imply that adivasis are the original inhabitants (Hardiman 1987: 15–16). The use of the term adivasi in the sense employed by radical scholars hardly takes note of the sense in which people, either outsiders or the tribals themselves, use it. Of course, not all groups that shared a common fate in the nineteenth century identify themselves as adivasis. Sections of the caste Hindu population, however deprived it may have been, invariably avoided being called adivasi for the term implied a loss of status.

#### References

- Béteille, Andrè. 1986. 'The Concept of Tribe with Special Reference to India.' *European Journal of Sociology* 27 (2): 297–318.
- ———. 1998. 'The Idea of Indigenous People.' *Current Anthropology* 39 (2): 187–91.
- Bose, N. K. 1941. 'The Hindu Method of Tribal Absorption.' *Science and Culture* 7.
- Daes, Erica-Irene A. 1996. 'Standard-setting Activities: Evolution of Standards Concerning the Rights of Indigenous People.' Working Paper by the Chairperson. United Nations Economic and Social Council, UN Document E/C.N.4/Sub. 2/AC.4/1996/2.
- Desai, A. R. 1977. 'Tribes in Transition', in Romila Thapar (ed.), *Tribe, Caste, and Religion*, New Delhi: Macmillan, pp. 15–28.
- Dube, S. C. (ed.). 1977. *Tribal Heritage of India*. New Delhi: Vikas Publishing House.
- Ghurye, G. S. 1963. *The Scheduled Tribes*. Bombay: Popular Prakashan.
- Hardiman, David. 1987. *The Coming of the Devi: Adivasi Assertion in Western India*. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
- Hermanns, Matthias. 1957. *Hinduism and Tribal Culture: An Anthropological Verdict on the Niyogi Report*. Madhya Pradesh (India). Bombay: Christian Missionary Activities Enquiry Committee. K. L. Fernandes [foreword 1957].
- ILO. 1957. 'Indigenous and Tribal Populations Convention, 1957 (N.107).' Convention Concerning the Protection and Integration of Indigenous and Other Tribal and Semi-Tribal Populations in Independent Countries. Geneva: ILO.
- ———. 1989. 'Indigenous and Tribal Populations Convention, 1989 (N.169).' Convention Concerning Indigenous Tribal Peoples in Independent Countries. Geneva: ILO.