## BLOW-DRY & VENT

## In Africa, hairdressers are being trained to offer mental health counselling - a creative solution that others can copy

OMETIMES, ALL THAT is needed is someone who will listen. In the cities of central and west Africa, among the poorest regions of the world, where mental health support is beyond access for many, hairdressers are being trained to provide at-risk people with a sympathetic ear and a shoulder to cry on. Designated as "mental health ambassadors", they are taught by mental health professionals to spot non-verbal signs of distress as they braid and blow-dry their clients' hair, gently seek information and give advice.

This creative approach to addressing what is now recognised as a basic need has a lesson for other countries struggling with a similar combination of low awareness and limited access to infrastructure and trained personnel. In India, for example, as noted by the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare in August, there are only 0.75 psychiatrists per 1,00,000 population. The Union government's national telemental health programme, called Tele Mental Health Assistance and Networking Across States (Tele-MANAS), providing free and round-the-clock assistance to those in distress, has made some difference  $-$  in his address at a Mental Health Day event last month, the Union Minister for Health said that 3,50,000 people had been counselled since the initiative's rollout in 2022. But in a nation of 1.4 billion, where about 40 per cent of the population has reported mental health distress, more needs to be done.

This could mean more proactive measures, including training people whose work involves daily contact with others, to recognise signs of distress. Salon professionals are particularly well-suited for this, as seen in the African initiative, as well as programmes like Hair 3Rs and Hairdressers with Hearts in Australia. As long as shame, lack of knowledge and money remain deterrents, creating networks of support within communities and enabling conversations in intimate, non-intimidating settings, can help a lot more people in distress.