# **Population Control**

**Robert J. Meier**

# **HISTORICAL BACKGROUND**

## **Evolutionary Perspective—Malthus and Darwin**

Thomas Robert Malthus, in his major work originally published in 1816, "Essay on the Principle of Population" (1968), projected a gloom and doom scenario for the human race in what he surmised to be a losing battle between population growth and an adequate food supply. Simply put, humans would multiply at a exponential rate (2, 4, 8, 16, etc.) while increasing food production only would occur at an arithmetic rate (1, 2, 3, 4, etc.). As a dire consequence, the human species would far outstrip its subsistence capacity, unless population growth was checked by such agents as famine and disease. We will have a closer look at the Malthusian doctrine later on, but for now it is important to note that it was Malthus who helped clarify for Charles Darwin a vexing problem he had regarding evolution. Darwin was searching for an understanding of how change would take place over time in a population, and in 1838 it was the writing of Malthus that led him to the notion of "struggle for existence," possibly due to limited food resources. Given that the reproductive potential of a population exceeded what appeared to him to be more or less stable population numbers, Darwin theorized that a selection process was operating to remove those individuals who were less able to successfully compete for restricted resources. He eventually published his theory of Natural Selection in 1859 (Darwin, 1892).

Malthus and Darwin established what to this day are considered to be natural "checks" that help to maintain or restore populations within the boundaries of resource availability. Resources, of course, come in many forms, not the least of which are an adequate food supply, mates, and a measure of secure habitat, or safe living environment. In terms of Darwinian evolution, then, population control was part and parcel of a natural process.

# **Cultural Revolution and Population Control Responses**

Were humans under the same constraint? Obviously Malthus must have thought that effective control was not yet in place, and from his perspective it was only going to get worse. He was correct given the subsequent unfolding of major events in human history, such as the Industrial Revolution, that led to high concentrations of people living in crowded, unsanitary cities.

However, looking over the long course of human history, now reckoned in terms of several million years, foraging populations lived in small, scattered groups, and local pressures on resources could be relieved temporarily at least through out-migration. In fact, it is quite likely that movements of precursor human groups within and between continents in early time periods were in part due to successful cultural and biological adaptation and reproduction. Population growth spurred outward expansion.

A clear picture of the number and timing of migrations has not yet emerged. One intriguing notion is that there was a major population bottleneck some hundreds of thousands of years ago, when it is projected that the source population from which all of present-day humans stem consisted of only 10,000 adults (Harpending, Sherry, Rogers, & Stoneking, 1993). It was from this base in Africa that principal migrations populated Eurasia. If this conjecture holds up under continued examination, then it would appear that population control for the human species did conform to natural evolutionary processes until relatively recently. Early human groups were subjected to the same kinds of adversities as other animals, that is, "struggles for existence," in the form of food and shelter shortages, some degree of predation, injuries and deaths from accidents, natural calamities, etc. However, there also was a growing advantage and environmental buffering in the form of cultural adaptation and evolution that would have begun making its impact. Cultural development along lines of improved tool-making technologies and more complex social organization, which may have been biologically grounded in brain evolution, provided the means of dispersal and also the capability of replacing or displacing earlier established precursor humans (Stringer, 1994). An alternative view is that the latest wave of human migrants interbred with some of the existing groups, and these subsequently evolved into modern Homo sapiens (Wolpoff & Caspari, 1997). It might be noted that within the scenario of population replacement, and to the extent that this action was intentional and confrontational, this possibly would represent the first instance of population control in human history whereby earlier inhabitants became extinct. The final version on this aspect of human history is yet to be written, however.

Picking up the story around tens of thousands of years ago, humans at that point had managed to disperse throughout all of the areas of their current distribution, in what some have conjectured to be a period of explosive population growth. For instance, Sherry et al. (1994), using mtDNA estimates, base the timing of this spectacular growth in the 40,000 to 60,000 year range, seemingly coinciding with major new cultural developments (Klein, 2000). Total world population size at this time could run into millions of individuals, which would be a rather remarkable recovery following the presumed bottleneck noted above. While there may have been local checks on population, such as periodic episodes of high mortality due to natural calamity and starvation (infectious disease would not likely to be present at this time because of the small groups and their scattered, intermittent contacts), the principal population dynamics seem to have involved high levels of reproduction followed by population expansion, that is, migration based on necessity and opportunity. To be sure, early, partially effective forms of birth control were probably being practiced, and these will be discussed shortly.

This picture of relatively small, mobile groups subsisting on a mixed foraging/hunting strategy characterizes much of human history. It was not until population density reached a critical mass, either through abundant local resources such as in certain riverine or coastal environments or through the development of plant and animal domestication (the "agricultural revolution" and associated market systems that brought large numbers of people together on a regular basis), that highly contagious and parasitic diseases found densely populated regions to be maintained and spread, and thereby exert death control on population growth. It can be conjectured that death control via infectious agents did occur during the past several thousand years of human history, but it was not until the Middle Ages that more precise accounting was done. For example, it is estimated that one third of the European population died during the bubonic plague ("Black Death") of the latter half of the 14th century, a catastrophe from which it did not recover until the mid-16th century (Livi-Bacci, 2001). Considering a more recent episode, it is reported that up to 500 million people died from smallpox epidemics during the 20th century (CBSHealthWatch, 2001). However, a large question does remain as to what long-lasting effect infectious disease, or any form of disease for that matter, has had on the overall growth of the human population? (The same question will be addressed later with respect to warfare.) Given the complete recovery of numbers following the cited events, and other similar epidemics, it can be argued that if there was any effect it has been for fairly restricted areas and only for relatively brief periods of time.

# **THEORIES AND METHODS**

### **Basics of Demography**

Demography studies the size, composition, distribution, and dynamics of populations. Size refers to the number of persons, usually counted in a census, which can be more or less accurate depending on the method and thoroughness of counting. Composition deals with a breakdown of total population in terms of sex and age categories, and can also include other categories such as race/ethnic group and SES. Distribution primarily maps the placement and density of populations. Finally, and most importantly for the topic of population control, dynamics covers the changes that take place within and between populations. In simple terms, population size change can occur depending upon the number of births versus the number of deaths, plus or minus the number of persons who migrate into or away from a population. Birth, fertility, reproductive, and death/mortality rates are more formally defined than will be utilized here. A highly useful presentation of demographic rates can be found in Gage (2000). Suffice it to say that this discussion on population control will be oriented toward some rather broad aspects of human endeavors to maintain, reduce, or increase total population size, or to restrict/promote

#### **Theories and Methods 271**

certain subsets of a population, both in terms of number and quality. Reference will be made to particular countries or cultures to help illustrate certain features of population control efforts.

A widely cited demographic measure is the doubling rate. The doubling rate is the number of years it would take for a population to reach a two-fold size increase. For example, given the current size of the world's population at more than six billion people, and given the current rate of increase at almost 1.8%, then the world is projected to have around 12 billion persons in about 40 years. This population size is predicted by some estimates to be beyond the maximum number of persons that can be accommodated on earth. A directed interest in the doubling rate is obvious to anyone concerned about overpopulation, which will be considered later.

#### **Demographic Transition Theory**

In tracing the demographic history of developed countries it became apparent that a rather regular pattern of change in population growth had taken place. Historical demographers devised a theory to account for this pattern, referred to as the demographic transition model. In its purest application, populations experienced three stages; initially represented by high levels of births (largely through short birth intervals) and deaths (largely through high infant and childhood mortality) that for the most part offset one another, so that there was little or no population growth. At a second stage, spurred on by improved quality of life through medical advancement, food production, and distribution, death rates declined while birth rates remained high. This, of course, led to an increase in population size. For the third stage, the theory stated that with continued economic and technological development, which brought about more opportunities and incentives to control family size, birth rates declined (mainly through longer birth spacing), and populations once again resumed a slow or no rate of growth. This traditional theory of the demographic transition model does not seem to apply universally; for instance, some developing countries seem to be caught in the second stage. Furthermore, anthropological research done on non-industrial societies shows that fertility levels are highly variable (Nag, 1973) and high mortality is not always found in hunting– gathering societies (Polgar, 1972). It may mean that social and cultural changes that precipitate or accompany the transition to lower birth and death rates are just too variable for the general model to handle. Indeed, an alternative demographic transition model (Social Justice Theory) has been proposed by Ratcliffe that does not rely on population control but rather on changing economic and social policies that would reduce poverty which in turn would reduce fertility levels (Hartmann, 1995).

#### **Ecological Models**

Imbedded within population ecology is the notion of carrying capacity, which basically asserts that there is a maximum population size for a particular set of environmental conditions. One population growth model, out of several that have been postulated, asserts that exceeding the maximum would result in degrees of environmental degradation, ultimately leading to a collapse of the entire ecosystem. This issue will be taken up in the next section.

It is generally assumed that during the period of exclusive foraging/hunting economy of our past, human groups could and did live in a "state of harmony" with nature, that is, within the constraints of carrying capacity. Whether this was intentional through a realized and understood concept of conservation of resources, or whether it was simply a matter of having a relatively low level of exploitative technology, is not always clear. Probably it was some of each. Certainly there was and still is a recognition by a numerous cultures of the connectedness between people and the environment through cosmology, subsistence, and even sophisticated understanding of ecological concepts. There is, of course, the highly practical understanding that living too long in one place can raise the risk of certain diseases and parasitic infections due to accumulated wastes. Hence, it might be argued that migrating to avoid pollution was one impetus for human population expansion.

The shifting of subsistence patterns from hunting/ foraging to that of sedentary agriculture very likely occurred during continuous periods of population growth. Whether or not population growth was a key stimulus to the development of agriculture, or whether agriculture was the base from which rapid population growth could take place, has been subject to theoretical dispute (Bogin, 2001). On the one hand, the Boserup theory of positive demographic pressure contends that increasing population brought forth increasing demand for food, followed by more intense efforts for food procurement through evermore effective agricultural technology (Livi-Bacci, 2001). The "classic" theory proposed by Childe argued that population growth was proceeded by discoveries and diffusion of new ideas concerning animal and plant domestication that resulted in a more secure, predictive food base (Livi-Bacci, 2001). Yet a third theory proposed by Cohen (1977) would explain the origins of agriculture somewhat along the lines of Boserup in that population pressure did contribute to an increasing reliance upon agricultural pursuits. In more specific terms, Cohen proposed that as hunting–gathering groups had begun to occupy the more productive areas, then under a model of continuous growth, subsequent groups would be relegated to making a living in areas that were nutritionally less adequate but yielded higher amounts of calories. Under this regime, populations increased in size while decreasing in quality of life, at least as measured by dietary intake. It is well known that deficiencies in diet can lead to a higher risk of contracting infectious and parasitic diseases. Hence, early sedentary populations are likely to have maintained a high level of mortality, to go along with an even higher level of fertility.

As noted earlier, it also seems likely that earlier human groups might well have avoided major problems in exceeding carrying capacity by migrating to new areas whenever pressure on local areas became too great. In more recent times, however, opportunities for migration were not very open, and this has prompted some new thinking and theory-building that promoted development and consumption on a sustainable level.

Sustainable development has its roots in Malthus of the late 1700s, but it was not until 1970 and thereafter that the concept was fully formed in bringing attention to excessive human exploitation of resources along with detrimental environmental consequences. Stemming from the 1992 Earth Summit held in Rio de Janeiro, goals and objectives of sustainable development were drafted to incorporate social, economic, and ecological concerns. Fundamental to any action taken was to insure human rights and needs for the present without compromising those of future generations. At the Rio Earth Summit, all countries were called on to formulate their own National Strategies for Sustainable Development (NSSD) and two target dates were proposed—2002, when NSSD was to be introduced, and 2005, when NSSD would begin implementation (NSSD, 2001).

How does NSSD deal with population growth and control? Conceptually, it does clearly recognize the impact uncontrolled development has on the environment, but maintains that this is not solely due to population size but to local concentrations of people who garner unequal exploitation and distribution of resources. The concept of sustainable development, if it is to have worldwide application, must deal with a number of interconnected issues plaguing developing countries such as economic disparity and political unrest, severe poverty and inadequate food supply, and highly fatal diseases, notably HIV/AIDS and malaria.

Sustainable development also has to marshal strategies that deal with loss of biodiversity in many plant and animal communities, as well as a corresponding form of diversity reduction observed in human communities that seems to characterize globalization. Effective population regulation in ecological systems depends on maintaining diversity in life forms that offer resilience, flexibility, and stability in the face of changing conditions. There is good reason to make the same claim for maintaining cultural diversity. Yet worldwide trends clearly indicate that consumerism, especially of Western goods and behaviors, is eroding once unique cultural identities. There is the recognition of this in the NSSD strategy statement as it calls for a balance between globalization and decentralization, the latter being an effort to maintain lower levels of control and influence (NSSD, 2001).

On theoretical grounds, sustainable development appears to provide a set of sound strategies for correcting current problems in population–environment interactions that will ensure a brighter future for generations ahead. Implementation of the NSSD plan, for example, presents challenging but hopefully not insurmountable difficulties.

### **Developments in Medicine**

Population growth, expressed as natural increase, is dependent upon the differential rate of births and deaths, more births than deaths results in a population increase, and of course, a decrease occurs when deaths overtake births. This section will summarize methods that have been developed to control causes of human mortality and factors that influence fertility.

**Death Control.** As noted above, causes of deaths in pre-industrial peoples likely centered on periodic episodes of starvation and repeated occurrences of serious injuries, from both man-made and natural events. The question as to whether compassion and care was extended to injured, physically disabled or aged persons has been

#### **Theories and Methods 273**

addressed (Dettwyler, 1991). While it can be conjectured that behaviors were devised and selected for if they reduced the death toll from accidents and mishaps, it was probably mainly in the area of food production, storage, and distribution that most control was exerted. That is, there were attempts to reduce the vagaries of nutritional intake.

With increasing industrialization and urbanization, involving larger and more densely settled populations, infectious disease could and did rise to become the leading cause of death. The bubonic plague that occurred in Europe in the first half of the 14th century was mentioned earlier. Improvements in sanitation and recognition by Louis Pasteur of the germ theory of disease toward the end of the 19th century meant that death control over infectious diseases could advance. Pasteurization of milk and vaccination against infectious agents may be partially responsible for major reductions in morbidity and mortality. However, as shown by McKeown's epidemiological research (cited in Hertzman, 2001), the death rate from TB in England and Wales experienced a sharp drop well before the introduction of antibiotics and administering of vaccinations. The explanation seems to rest along social and economic lines. Indeed, Hertzman (2001) presents a strong argument for death control by way of psychosocial determinants (quality of the social environment), along with socioeconomic indicators, expressed in terms of a gradient of health status determined, for example, by the equality/inequality of income within a society. A steeper gradient in wealth leads to marked differences in health. Gage (2000) provides an illuminating discussion of the historical variation in mortality by making a distinction between proximate causes (the disease itself) and ultimate causes (the psychosocial support system).

The leading causes of death in America have now shifted to "lifestyle" diseases, notably heart disease and cancer. For clarification, recent genomic research has allowed scientists to claim they have discovered the "gene" for some of these chronic conditions. This too is an oversimplification in that genetic predisposition triggered by certain environmental events, including once again the social environment, combine and interact to make the risk for contracting and dying from these "lifestyle" diseases rather more complex. It is the case that a substantial portion of medical research is devoted toward finding treatments and cures, somewhat less for preventive measures. In short, Western medicine runs its course of attempting to gain as near as possible full control over the modern causes of death. Medical advancements in surgical techniques, nuclear medicine, medications, and the like do offer great promise for sustaining human life at a high level of vitality throughout the later years. Yet, if this advanced medicine is restricted to only those who can afford it, and if inequalities of health provision (Hertzman, 2001) are not addressed, then the general picture of health will not likely improve for a substantial number of humans. Beyond that, much of the world still must contend with childhood diarrhea, malaria, and infectious diseases. HIV/AIDS has reached crisis levels in some countries, while outbreaks of the ebola virus and bubonic plague are distinct threats.

**Birth Control.** Reproduction is of course the vital force of any ongoing population. Differential reproduction, wherein some adults are more successful at leaving offspring than others, is the hallmark of Darwin's theory of natural selection. Accordingly, some populations persist, perhaps to grow, while others undergo extinction. To be sure, the human population is among the former. As discussed earlier, ancestral human groups had the opportunity to undergo major expansions and migrations seemingly without any lasting effect of natural checks on their population growth. Indeed, highly successful adaptation as measured by reproductive output might well have been one impetus for these groups to migrate. At that time period, intentional limiting of births was not likely so relevant. Hence, natural fertility may well have been in place, but this would not preclude such practices as postpartum abstinence since this may have been done more for the health of the mother and her nursing baby (Whiting, 1964) than to deliberately limit births (Wood, 1994). Then too, the concept of natural fertility has been clarified with regard to postpartum "contact" in the Gambia (Bledsoe & Hill, 1998) while Ellison (2001) offers a different perspective regarding the role of lactation in postpartum fecundity.

There was, of course, a time when human groups did devise more or less effective measures to control the number and spacing of births, in part at least as a necessity or desire to control population growth, for both personal and communal reasons. Some traditional birth control methods that are documented in the ethnographic record include ingested noxious herbal agents, aggressive massage, ligatures and mechanical devices for aborting ongoing pregnancies. Infanticide/infant abandonment, and fatalities from child abuse or neglect, also were present. Selective survival of children born with disabilities has always been a cold fact of evolution. Birth defects would increase the risk of mortality on its own, along with added economic, medical, and social pressures on parents to provide reduced childcare investment, often manifested by neglect and abuse. However, given their relative rarity (approximately 5% of total live births), deaths due to birth defects, directly or indirectly, are not likely to have been a significant contributor to overall mortality rates.

Still later, presumably after the recognition of paternity, abstinence (through celibacy, delayed marriage, and postpartum taboos) and *coitus interruptus* (withdrawal) were practiced. These were followed by increasing reproduction knowledge that led to the timing of sexual intercourse—the "rhythm method." Together, the rhythm and withdrawal methods make up 15% of overall contraceptive use according to a worldwide survey (Fathalla, 1994). These methods are much more likely to be used in developed countries. The now wellstudied temporary loss of fecundity or lower risk of pregnancy during lactation and breast-feeding, "postpartum amenorrhea" (Ellison, 2001; Ellison & O'Rourke, 2000; Wood, 1994) may have been partially understood for some time into the past (Ramos, Kennedy, & Visness, 1996). Some of these methods might be considered "low tech," perhaps to reflect their relatively high failure rate. Others, such as infanticide, while totally effective, must have exacted a terrible blow to emotional well-being, as well as considerable energy expenditure incurred by the mother who experienced the death of her infant.

The birth control industry has developed over time to a point where monetary costs, failure rate, ease of use, side-effects, as well as moral and religious attitudes, all leed into decisions of whether or not and which method/s to use. A brief survey of these methods follows, some will receive further attention in the Issues section.

**Contraception.** Preventing a pregnancy can take many forms, some of which were mentioned as part of earlier attempts at birth control such as periodic abstinence, the "rhythm" method, *coitus interruptus*, etc. In fact, it was not until after 1820 in England that any preventative measure other than delaying marriage (abstinence) was openly considered (Field, 1968). The next century was to see major advancements toward fertility control through contraception, notably by gaining knowledge about female reproductive hormones. By 1960, the FDA approved marketing in the United States of "the pill." Its action was based on administering progestin (an artificially synthesized progesterone) as an ovulation suppressor. Depo-Provera is an injectable form of ovulation inhibitor. Hormonal pills account for about 16% of all contraceptive use worldwide (Fathalla, 1994).

Barrier contraceptives, many accompanied by spermicide, include the condom, diaphragm, and the cervical cap. Condoms alone make up 10% of worldwide contraceptive use (Fathalla, 1994). Of course, in addition to birth control, condoms are also used for greatly reducing the risk of contracting sexually transmitted diseases (STDs).

All of the contraceptive methods mentioned above are seen as temporary. On the other hand, voluntary sterilization (tubal ligation for females and vasectomy for males), is generally considered permanent, although limited success of reversal has been reported. On a worldwide basis, sterilization is the most frequently practiced method. For females it occurs 26% and males 10% of total contraceptive use (Fathalla, 1994). It is important to note that roughly two thirds of sterilization is done in developing countries.

**Contragestin.** Physical and chemical means to interrupt a pregnancy at its earliest stages define the action of contragestins, that is, they prevent gestation. One of the most prominently used devices is the intra-uterine device (IUD), while hormones that block implantation are found in Norplant and the "morning after" pill. Most recently introduced to the U.S. market is RU486, which serves as a non-surgical means of abortion, cleared by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for use up through about 7–9 weeks of gestation. The IUD method is practiced 19% of the time for those using some form of birth control (Fathalla, 1994).

Elective surgical abortion technically might be classed as a contragestin form of reproductive management. When applied for this purpose it is customarily carried out during the early stages of gestation, notably the first trimester. This topic will be given extended coverage in the next section.

**Contranatals.** As this term implies, fertility control is exerted after the child is born, by way of infanticide shortly after birth, or instances of child abuse/abandonment and benign neglect (cf. Cassidy, 1980, 1987) that result in death. Dettwyler, in her widely acclaimed book,

#### **Issues and Controversies 275**

*Dancing Skeletons, Life and Death in West Africa* (1994), offers a heart rendering glimpse into how poverty and lack of some basic nutritional knowledge can be a lethal combination for a young child. It was mentioned earlier that some populations have regulated birth spacing or a desired son-preference outcome through female infanticide (Miller, 1987; Segal, 2001). As might be expected, precise numbers on contranatal practices are not readily available. One study indicated that as many as 38 million abortions are done each year in Southern countries, with perhaps 20 million of these carried out without proper medical supervision (Germain, Nowrojee, & Pyne, 1994). On the other hand, it is reported that in 25 countries, which contain about 40% of the world's population, abortion is permitted and properly performed through certain stages of gestation without requiring specific grounds (Fathalla, 1994).

#### **The Population Establishment**

Various groups have participated in population matters. Below is a listing of some of the more prominent of these governmental and private organizations. For a more complete description and critique see Hartmann (1995).

- AID—The U.S. Agency for International Development
- UNFPA—The United Nations Fund for Population Activities
- The World Bank
- IPPF—The International Planned Parenthood Federation
- The Population Council
- Foundations—Ford, Hewlitt, MacArthur, Mellon, and Rockefeller

# **ISSUES AND CONTROVERSIES**

This section will briefly present some major issues that have come up with respect to population control. It is not possible to cover all of the nuances of the arguments or to represent every position. And it certainly is not possible to resolve any of these issues or controversies here.

### **Overpopulation**

Alarming demographic projections regarding ineffectively controlled human population growth and consequent environmental catastrophes have spawned several literary warnings with ominous titles (e.g., Ehrlich, *The Population Bomb*, 1968; Carson, *Silent Spring* 1962). Perhaps no sentinel in this camp is better known than Garrett Hardin who, for more than four decades, sounded the clarion for those so inclined to heed the call. His numerous works (e.g., 1968 ("Tragedy"); 1969 (*Population, Evolution and Birth Control*); 1974 ("Living in a Lifeboat"); 1993 (*Living within Limits*) pose educated scenarios and optional solutions with respect to the future of humankind. Essentially, the message is that, given finite resources and limited space (he argues that interstellar colonization will not work), human population growth must be contained or a default resolution will be imposed by natural selection, that is, nature will exact its toll. On a broader scale, The Club of Rome was organized in 1968 by a group of 30 persons from 10 countries (later expanded to include 25 nations) to present warnings of what they thought would happen if population growth and economic production continued at the same pace (cf. Meadows et al., 1974; Neurath, 1994). Zero Population Growth (ZPG) was a private organization that used the slogan, "Stop at Two!" (Hardin, 1993). ZPG would be achieved if fertility remained at an average of 2.1 births per woman, the so-called replacement rate (Adamson, Belden, DaVanzo, & Patteron, 2000). Of course, any lower average fertility and a population would decline.

Countering the ZPG and Hardin positions also has been a highly active endeavor by those who purported to show in various connected themes that resources are not as limited nor population growth so detrimental (e.g., Simon & Kahn, 1984, *The Resourceful Earth*). The crux of their argument is that technological and economic developments will continue to expand whatever might be the current limits of carrying capacity, so that resources will not be depleted, and in fact, continued population growth will be a stimulus for future development. One branch of anti-Malthusian followers were called Cornucopians (Hartmann, 1995).

Is there a meeting ground for these opposing viewpoints? While any disagreement may be in the realm of "only time will tell," cautioned optimism has been voiced by some (e.g., Livi-Bacci, 2001).

### **Northern Country OverConsumption**

This issue is basically a contest of quantity versus quality. The focal points are that even though a larger population requires an ever-increasing share of the resources, the available resources are not, and perhaps rarely ever have been, equitably distributed. To the point, Northern countries, due to certain historical outcomes, have managed to control most of the earth's resources as well as the technology for future energy capture. It has been reported that the industrialized nations, which comprise only 22% of the world's population, actually consume 70% of the world's resources (Hartmann, 1995). This favored position allows for a standard of living that far exceeds that of the developing Southern countries. However, there is a high cost that goes along with a high standard. First, currently available resources are being drained to maintain the high standard, some would argue at an alarming rate. Additionally, the very nature of much of current energy conversion and consumption (notably through fossil fuels and nuclear power) yield large amounts of pollution and toxic/radioactive wastes. These effects are hardly conducive to a healthy planet or its inhabitants.

It seems doubtful that a stable, long-term resolution to this "haves versus have-nots" problem would be achieved solely through a more equitable redistribution of resources, although certainly that would relieve the plight of those many who now endure a poor quality of life. Realistically, it does not appear possible to raise the quality of life for all to that high level presently enjoyed throughout the Northern countries. Hence, a more permanent fix calls for a reduction at the high end of the quality of life scale to go along with an elevation at the low end.

## **Forced Migration and Immigration Restrictions**

Human migration was viewed in an earlier section to be a way out for hunting–foraging groups in order to allow for continued population growth without placing undue pressure for survival on the limited resources of a given area. However, at some point in human history most of the productive areas of the world were occupied, and as a consequence competition was waged between individuals and groups for inhabitable space. Some might argue that the demise of Neanderthals came about as they encountered more modern humans, but that outcome is not yet proved to everyone's satisfaction. Displacement and/or replacement that far back in time provide academically interesting points of departure for research, but jumping forward to more contemporary periods brings out some of the most troubling events in human history involving involuntary movement of peoples. One need only mention the forced transport of African slaves to the New World and the Holocaust of World War II to bring home painful reminders of just how horrible population control can be.

Unfortunately, history is not finished in providing these painful lessons. At the present time refugees and their makeshift camps can be found in many parts of the world. Large numbers of people have been forced to leave their homelands in such examples as some African countries, former Yugoslavia, and Central Eurasia. Tragically, instances of forced movements of people are often accompanied by acts of genocide, recently termed, "ethnic cleansing" (Bok, 1994). Although the geopolitics are complex and do of course vary by region, there is an underlying commonality in the resultant very poor quality of life for these masses of suffering people. Controversies abound as to what should be done, and by whom. One action that has led to even greater concern is that of restricted immigration policies where oppressed peoples find borders closed to them.

### **Warfare and Population Control**

The controversial nature of this topic seems patently obvious. After all, the killing of our own species seems morally repugnant to most people. Nonetheless, deeply imbedded in human acts of war there exist primal responses that at times characterize the competitive behavior found throughout the animal world. To say that warfare is our evolutionary heritage probably is not truly appropriate, since cooperation must have been at least as important as competition over the long haul of human history. Yet, it is important to acknowledge that more recent wars among humans do have a long history of engaged groups as they competed for space, resources, and ideologies. From an evolutionary perspective, intergroup selection is a model that has been applied to human population genetics (Cavalli-Sforza & Bodmer, 1999). The question posed here is: Has warfare served to check population growth among humans?

In an earlier appraisal of this matter, Bates (1968) stated that while it was difficult to accurately document by numbers, recurring wars between 1650 and 1950 did not effectively slow the rate of worldwide human growth. He reasoned that there was indeed a decline in birth rate due to disruption of families, and of course there were wartime casualties and attendant mortality due to famine and disease. But postwar "baby booms" seem to

#### **Issues and Controversies 277**

have allowed populations to rapidly recover their wartime losses. On the other hand, Bates (1968) also argued, based on research done by Alfred Kroeber, that some Eastern Native American tribes may have had their population growth limited due to sustained war. But once again this kind of conjecture is unencumbered with clear numerical documentation.

While this very brief discussion does not delve very thoroughly into the matter, it does seem probable that warfare per se has not systematically resulted in checking human population growth, at least in terms of worldwide trends. This does not mean that in more localized areas, and perhaps in much earlier times, war and warlike activities were not limiting the rate of population growth, and in some cases could well have precipitated massive depopulation and even extinction of some groups. As pointed out by Harris and Ross (1987), it is important to distinguish between warfare as carried out at the village and band level, which likely did restrain population growth, from war and conquests in imperial contexts which were carried out for territorial expansion. And then, in either case, it is important to note that numbers do not tell the whole story of the misery and suffering connected with warfare.

## **Biological Warfare—Present, Future, and Past**

Concerns about bioterrorists' attacks recently have heightened, for good reason. Outbreaks of anthrax disease and bacterial exposure have placed the United States and portions of Europe on high alert. The alarm has sounded to include other, even more deadly pathogens such as the smallpox virus that possibly are being prepared for attacks on the public. The present status of high alert prompts the same question that goes back to World War I and then repeated at times during subsequent wars and conflicts: Are nations or terrorist groups planning to engage in biological or chemical warfare? While no large-scale offensive attack has occurred as yet (there are recorded or suspected contained incidents), the very question led to stock-piling and testing by some countries purportedly as defensive moves. The very grave future threat that these weapons of mass mortality pose could lead to loss of life that far exceeds that from prior use of conventional, or even until now, nuclear warfare. Unfortunately, warfare as a check to population growth may take on new meaning in the future.

But perhaps the past can serve here as a guide and warning. Historical records are replete with examples of peoples who underwent major depopulation, some to extinction, following initial contacts with European colonists (Livi-Bacci, 2001). It has been estimated that in the three centuries following initial European contact, the native population that inhabited the area that later would become the United States was reduced from 5 million to 60,000 (Thornton, 1987). The affected populations were vulnerable to what has been called the "virgin soil" theory, which presumes that there was little natural immunity to contagious agents, so that epidemics raged and mass mortality ensued both directly from the pathogen itself but also from overwhelming the native systems of health care and daily functioning. Native healers and traditional medicine had little experience from which to counter these foreign microbial attacks. Devastated groups included the Maoris of New Zealand, the Taino of the Dominican Republic, the Tierra del Fuegans, and the Tasmanians, all of which experienced major population loss, in major part due to infectious disease (Livi-Bacci, 2001).

These particular instances may not be biological warfare, simply because it cannot be shown conclusively that there was deliberate use of pathogens as weapons against native peoples. This probably also applies to assertions that smallpox-contaminated blankets were passed along to American Indian tribes. However, it is well documented that the wrath of infectious disease among Native Americans took a massive toll on life. Numerous tribes buckled under the more advanced technology of the colonists, who progressively replaced and displaced them (Livi-Bacci, 2001).

#### **Eugenics and Sterilization Programs**

The historical practice of eugenics has indelibly scarred attempts at reproductive control that was based upon both reducing the number of people and also eliminating certain kinds. Thus, race/ethnicity, sex, mental status, physical ability, and income-level all have served to identify those who were involuntarily sterilized and, in more extreme cases, put to death. Technically, this is referred to as negative eugenics, since it prohibited the reproduction by those so identified. The converse practice, that of positive eugenics, was also applied, where once again selected groups were promoted for their reproductive contribution. Shapiro (1985) has provided an account, based on case studies as well as broader studies, of sterilization abuse among U.S. women, as does Hartmann (1995) with respect to Native women. As will be discussed below, procreative rights stand in most people's eyes as a foundation of humanity. Hence, forced sterilization is seen to violate reproductive freedom, irrespective of the good intention as defined by those who carry out the act.

A voiced concern in more recent times is whether certain biomedical developments might constitute a new form of eugenics. This issue centers on the growing capability of identifying genes that are in part responsible for determining such behavorial traits as intelligence and personality, or desired physical attributes such as stature. When this capability is realized there will be the potential for abuse in either selecting prenatally for these traits, or postnatally under the guise of gene therapy. Nonmedical (in certain instances this could be termed "cosmetic") applications of the new genetics obviously fall within the purview of quality control of humans, and they raise the spector of earlier eugenics movements. Certainly the stakes have been raised now that human cloning may be added to the controversial mix. However, in spite of the danger of potential abuse, it does seem that there is a place for legitimate medical uses of gene therapy.

### **Abortion as Birth Control**

Few topics engender more heated discussion than that of abortion. It seems fair to say that much of this rancor stems from strong religious and moral prohibitions to the practice of intentionally terminating viable pregnancies. Some concern might also be expressed from a strictly pragmatic point of view that abortion is a costly (in terms of fetal wastage) practice. Here we will focus on nontherapeutic abortion which is meant to limit the number of births, rather than those abortions that occur spontaneously, that is, miscarriages, and those resulting from surgical procedures that are medically indicated when the health and well-being of mother and/or fetus are compromised by a continued pregnancy.

It already has been mentioned that hunting–foraging groups had practiced abortion, along with infanticide, in order to control both the timing and number of children being born. Too many children in a short period of time could be a liability. On the other hand, children born into a subsistence agricultural setting could be deemed an asset rather than a burden. Additional children might well improve household economy. While subsistence livelihoods are still prevalent throughout the world today, the controversial nature of abortion as a population control measure centers on particular countries, perhaps exemplified by the United States and China.

Abortion in the United States is legal and may be used as part of family planning. In this application it appears that parents mostly carry out their decision to terminate a pregnancy at the personal or family level, often dealing with "unwanted" pregnancies. Antiabortion groups have marshaled forces to thwart the practice of abortion, and have made attempts to overthrow the *Roe v. Wade* decision. One highly visible group, the Center for Bio-Ethical Reform, denounces abortion as an act of genocide through its display of highly graphic posters. This action is countered by Pro-Choice advocates, and organizations such as Planned Parenthood maintain that safe, readily available abortions should be contained within a broad framework of family planning. Not surprisingly, there is little likelihood that the abortion controversy in the United States will be resolved in the near future.

The situation in China offers a different perspective on the abortion controversy. China instituted a national population policy in the 1970s that employed abortion within its highly coercive family planning program that established birth quotas. In the 1980s, both incentives (in the form of wage and pension increases, medical and educational benefits, etc.) as well as disincentives (such as salary cuts and loss of benefits) were imposed on Chinese couples (Livi-Bacci, 2001). China's population policy has been viewed as an attack on basic human rights as well as a targeted assault on women's rights, since forced abortions often selected female fetuses (Hartmann, 1994). More recently the one-child policy has been relaxed somewhat, and the coercive program is being phased out as China has been able to realize some of its demographic goals by sharply reducing fertility (Livi-Bacci, 2001).

Another controversy concerning abortion has arisen in its use to selectively abort female fetuses in favor of son-preference (Hartmann, 1995). This practice has been documented in India and other developing countries (Miller, 1987; Segal, 2001), where initially amniocentesis and now ultrasound are done to ascertain sex. Selective abortion combined with neglect have resulted in a low female to male sex ratio among children in India (Segal, 2001).

# **Procreative and Reproductive Rights and Responsibilities**

As might be expected, whenever restrictions are placed on people's actions or activities, there will be resistance, particularly if these restrictions are seen to violate fundamental human rights. Does this apply to reproduction and procreative rights? There are at least three issues that are raised.

- 1. Individual/Human Rights versus Public Good. This matter boils down to parental rights to have as many children as desired (cf. Adamson et al., 2000) in opposition to one or more levels of the government placing limits on family size. China was discussed earlier in this regard.
- 2. Women's Health and Fertility. Some of the most cogent discussion of reproductive rights has come from a position that argues for empowerment of women generally. For instance, Hartmann (1995) succinctly presents this argument for government policy to address women's reproductive health needs rather than attempting to impose population control measures, which she stated often have denied women's rights in the area of fertility and family planning.
- 3. Men's Responsibility in Family Planning. This takes on the issue of more actively involving men in family planning, such as a consistent use of condoms, undergoing vasectomy (which is less risky than tubal ligation), and being receptive to research development that may lead to a male contraceptive pill (Ren et al., 2001).

# **Family Planning and/or Maternal– Child Health Care**

The matter becomes controversial as governmental agencies, as well as nongovernment organizations (NGOs), prepare budgets, when their assets are not sufficient to adequately fund both areas. In some instances, AID and other programs have interceded on behalf of mothers and their children, in meeting their nutritional and medical needs, but have neglected to provide family planning services, perhaps due to sensitivity issues.

## **Human Population Control on Other Species**

Efforts to control our own population have obviously been a stormy sea of consequences. Good intentions have been morally questionable at times, and there are those who would argue that any attempt at human population control is wrong. This issue carries over to other life forms which humans have either directly (as in domestication) or indirectly (as in habitat destruction) altered the course of evolution. Like it or not, we are the species that will largely determine the fate of other creatures, large and small. How we do this, of course, is the nature of the controversy.

# **REFERENCES**

- Adamson, D. M., Belden, N., DaVanzo, J., & Patterson, S. (2000). *How Americans view world population issues. A survey of public opinion*. Santa Monica, CA: RAND.
- Bates, M. (1968). Role of war, famine, and disease in controlling populations. In L.B. Young (Ed.), *Population in perspective* (pp. 30–60). New York: Oxford University Press.
- Bledsoe, C., & Hill, A. G. (1998). Social norms, natural fertility, and the resumption of postpartum "contact" in The Gambia. In A.M. Basu & P. Aaby (Eds.), *The methods and uses of anthropological demography* (pp. 268–297). Oxford: Clarendon Press.
- Bogin, B. (2001). *The growth of humanity*. New York: Wiley–Liss.
- Bok, S. (1994). Population and ethics: Expanding the moral space. In G. Sen, A. Germain, & L. C. Chen (Eds.), *Population policies reconsidered. Health, empowerment, and rights* (pp. 15–26). Boston, MA: Harvard University Press.
- CBSHealthWatch (2001). *Studying smallpox: A brief history of the killer*. Retrieved from http://www.cbshealthwatch.com/cx/ viewarticle/404956.
- Carson, R. (1962). *Silent spring*. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
- Cassidy, C. M. (1980). Benign neglect and toddler malnutrition. In L.S. Greene & F. Johnston (Eds.), *Social and biological predictors of nutritional status, physical growth, and neurological development* (pp. 109–139). New York: Academic Press.
- Cassidy, C. M. (1987). World-view conflict and toddler malnutrition. In N. Scheper-Hughes (Ed.), *Child survival. Anthropological perspectives on the treatment and maltreatment of children* (pp. 293–324). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: D. Reidel.
- Cavalli-Sforza, L. L., & Bodmer, W. F. (1999). *The genetics of human populations*. Mineola, NY: Dover.
- Cohen, M. (1977). The *food crisis in prehistory, overpopulation and the origins of agriculture*. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
- Darwin, C. (1892). *The origin of species by means of natural selection*. New York: Appleton.
- Dettwyler, K. A. (1991). Can paleopathology provide evidence for "compassion"? *American Journal of Physical Anthropology, 84*, 375–384.
- Dettwyler, K. A. (1994). *Dancing skeletons. Life and death in West Africa*. Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press.
- Ehrlich, P. R. (1968). *The population bomb*. New York: Ballantine Books.
- Ellison, P. T. (2001). *On fertile ground. A natural history of human reproduction*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
- Ellison, P. T., & O'Rourke, M. T. (2000). Population growth and fertility regulation. In S. Stinson, B. Bogin, R. Huss-Ashmore, & D. O'Rourke (Eds.), *Human biology. An evolutionary and biocultural perspective* (pp. 553–586). New York: Wiley–Liss.
- Fathalla, M. F. (1994). Fertility control technology: A women-centered approach to research. In G. Sen, A. Germain, & L. C. Chen (Eds.),