# **Bachelier, Louis (1870–1946)**

## **Formation Years**

Louis Bachelier was born in Le Havre, France, on March 11, 1870. His father, a native of Bordeaux, moved to Le Havre after his marriage to the daughter of a notable citizen of Le Havre. He started a wine and spirits shop, and bought and exported wines from Bordeaux and Champagne. At the time, Le Havre was an important port. The Protestant bourgeoisie in the city, which dominated the local cotton and coffee markets, occupied the upper echelons of society. The young Louis was educated at a high school in Le Havre. He seems to have been a fairly good student, but he interrupted his studies after earning his high school diploma in 1889, when both of his parents died in the span of a few weeks. To provide for his youngest brother and his older sister, most likely, he took over his father's business, but he sold it after a few years. In 1892, he completed his military service as an infantryman and then moved to Paris, where his activities are unclear. What is clear, however, is that Bachelier focused on his interests in the stock market and undertook university studies at the University of Paris, where in 1895 he obtained his bachelor's degree in the mathematical sciences, without being a particularly distinguished student. After earning his degree, he continued to attend the lectures of the Faculty, including courses in mathematical physics taught by Poincare and Boussinesq. ´

Although we cannot be absolutely certain, it is likely that in 1894, Bachelier attended lectures in probability theory given by Poincare, which were ´ published in 1896 and were based on the remarkable treatise that Joseph Bertrand published in 1888. His attendance at these lectures, his reading of treatises by Bertrand and Poincare, and his interest ´ in the stock market probably inspired his thesis, "theory of speculation", which was defended by Bachelier [1] in Paris on March 29, 1900, before a jury composed of Appell, Boussinesq, and Poincare.´ On the report by Henri Poincare, he was conferred the ´ rank of Doctor of Mathematics with an "honorable" designation, that is, a designation insufficient for him to obtain employment in higher education, which was extremely limited at the time.

Let us say a few words about this extraordinary thesis. The problem investigated by Bachelier is described in less than a page. The stock market is subject to innumerable random influences, and so it is unreasonable to expect a mathematically precise forecast of stock prices. However, we can try to establish the law of the changes in stock prices over a fixed period of time. The determination of this law was the subject of Bachelier's thesis. The thesis was not particularly original. Since the early nineteenth century, people had applied probability theory to study exchange rates. In France, in particular, we can cite the work of Bicquilley (around 1800) or Jules Regnault (around 1850). In his thesis, Bachelier [1] intended to revisit this issue from several viewpoints taken from physics and probability theory, as these subjects were taught in Europe, including Paris, around 1900. He adapted these viewpoints to aid his investigation. The first method he used is the method adopted by Einstein, five years later, to determine the law of Brownian motion in a physical context. It consists of studying the integral equation that governs the probability that the change in price is *y* at time *t*, under two natural assumptions: the change in price during two separate time intervals is independent and the expectation of the change in price is zero. The resulting equation is a homogeneous version of the diffusion equation, now known as the *Kolmogorov* (or *Chapman–Kolmogorov*) *equation*, in which Bachelier boldly asserts that the appropriate solution is given by a centered Gaussian law with variance proportional to time *t*. He proved a statement already proposed, without justification, by Regnault in 1860 that the expectation of the absolute change in price after time *t* is proportional to the square root of *t*.

But this first method, which would eventually be used in the 1930s by physicists and probabilists, did not seem to satisfy Bachelier, since he proposed a second method, which was further developed in the 1930s by the Moscow School: the approximation of the law of Brownian motion by an infinite sequence of coin flips, properly normalized. Since the change in price over a given period of time is the result of a very large number of independent random variables, it is not surprising that this change in price is Gaussian. But the extension of this approximation to a continuous-time version is not straightforward. Bachelier, who already know the result he wanted to obtain, states and prepares the way to the first known version of a theorem, which in the current language reads as follows: let  $\{X_1, X_2, \ldots, X_n, \ldots\}$ be a sequence of independent random variables taking values 1 or  $-1$  with probability  $1/2$ . If we let  $S_n =$  $X_1 + \cdots + X_n$  and let [x] denote the integer part of a real number  $x$ , then

$$\left(\frac{1}{\sqrt{n}}S_{[nt]}, t \ge 0\right) \longrightarrow \left(B_t, t \ge 0\right) \qquad (1)$$

in law as  $n \longrightarrow \infty$ , where  $(B_t, t \ge 0)$  is a standard Brownian motion.

This second method, which is somewhat difficult to read and not very rigorous, naturally leads to the previous solution. But it is still not sufficient. Bachelier proposes a third method, the "radiation (or diffusion) of probability". Bachelier, having attended the lectures of Poincaré and Boussinesq on the theory of heat, was aware of the "method of Laplace", which gives the fundamental solution of the heat equation, a solution that has exactly the form given by the first (and second) methods used by Bachelier. Hence, there is a coincidence to be elucidated. We know that Laplace probably knew the reason for this coincidence. Lord Rayleigh had recently noticed this coincidence in his solution to the problem of "random phases". It is likely that neither Bachelier nor Poincaré had read the work of Rayleigh. Anyway, Bachelier, in turn, explains this curious intersection between the theory of heat and the prices of annuities on the Paris stock exchange. This is his third method, which can be summarized as follows.

Consider the game of flipping a fair coin an infinite number of times and set  $f(n, x) = \mathbb{P}(S_n = x)$ . It has been known since at least the seventeenth century that

$$f(n+1,x) = \frac{1}{2}f(n,x-1) + \frac{1}{2}f(n,x+1)$$
(2)

Subtracting  $f(n, x)$  from both the sides of the equation, we obtain

$$f(n+1,x) - f(n,x) = \frac{1}{2} \Big( f(n,x+1) - 2f(n,x) + f(n,x-1) \Big)$$
(3)

It then suffices to take the unit 1 in the preceding equation to be infinitely small to obtain the heat equation

$$\frac{\partial f}{\partial n} = \frac{1}{2} \frac{\partial^2 f}{\partial x^2} \tag{4}$$

whose solution is the law of a centered Gaussian random variable with variance  $n$ .

#### **Theory of Speculation**

At the stock market, probability radiates like heat. This "demonstrates" the role of Gaussian laws in problems related to the stock market, as acknowledged by Poincaré himself in his report: "A little reflection shows that the analogy is real and the comparison legitimate. The arguments of Fourier are applicable, with very little change, to this problem that is so different from the problem to which these arguments were originally applied." And Poincaré regretted that Bachelier did not develop this point further, though this point would be developed in a masterly way by Kolmogorov in a famous article published in 1931 in the Mathematische Annalen. In fact, the first and third methods used by Bachelier are intrinsically linked: the Chapman-Kolmogorov equation for any regular Markov process is equivalent to a partial differential equation of parabolic type. In all regular Markovian schemes that are continuous, probability radiates like heat from a fire fanned by the thousand winds of chance. And further work, exploiting this real analogy, would transform not only the theory of Markov processes but also the century-old theory of Fourier equations and parabolic equations.

Now, having determined the law of price changes, all calculations of financial products involving time follow easily. But Bachelier did not stop there. He proposed a general theory of speculation integrating all stock market products that could be proposed to clients, whose (expected) value at maturity—and therefore whose price—can be calculated using general formulas resulting from theory. The most remarkable product that Bachelier priced was based on the maximum value of a stock during the period between its purchase and a maturity date (usually one month later). In this case, one must determine the law of the maximum of a stock price over some interval of time. This problem would be of concern to Norbert Wiener, the inventor of the mathematical theory of Brownian motion, in 1923. It involves knowing *a priori* the law of the price over an infinite time interval, but it was not known—either in 1923 or in 1900—how to easily calculate the integrals of functions of an infinite number of variables. Let us explain the reasoning used by Bachelier [1] as an example of his methods of analysis.

Bachelier proceeded in two different ways. The first way was based on the second method developed in Bachelier's thesis. It consists of discretizing time in steps of  $\Delta t$ , and introducing a change in price at each step of  $\pm \Delta x$ . Bachelier wanted to calculate the probability that before time  $t = n\Delta t$ , the game (or price) exceeds a given value  $c = m\Delta x$ . Let  $n =$  $m+2p$ . Bachelier proposed to first calculate the probability that the price  $c$  is reached for the first time at exactly time  $t$ . To this end, he uses the gambler's ruin argument: the probability is equal to  $(m/n)C_n^p 2^{-n}$ , which Bachelier obtained from the ballot formula of Bertrand, which he learned from Poincaré or Bertrand's work, or perhaps both. It suffices to then pass properly to the limit so that  $\Delta x = \mathcal{O}(\sqrt{\Delta t})$ . One then obtains the probability that the price exceeds  $c$  before  $t$ . Bachelier then noted that this probability is equal to twice the probability that the price exceeds  $c$  at time  $t$ .

The result is Bachelier's formula for the law of the maximum  $M_t$  of the price  $B_t$  over the interval  $[0, t]$ ; that is,

$$\mathbb{P}(M_t > c) = 2\mathbb{P}(B_t > c) \tag{5}$$

It would have been difficult to proceed in a simpler fashion. Having obtained this formula, Bachelier had to justify it in a simple way to understand why it holds. Bachelier therefore added to his first calculation (which was somewhat confusing and difficult to follow) a "direct demonstration" without passing to the limit. He used the argument that "the price cannot pass the threshold  $c$  over a time interval of length  $t$  without having done so previously" and hence that

$$\mathbb{P}(B_t > c) = \mathbb{P}(M_t > c)\alpha \tag{6}$$

where  $\alpha$  is the probability that the price c, having been attained before time  $t$ , is greater than  $c$  at time t. The latter probability is obviously  $1/2$ , due to symmetry of the sample paths that go above and that remain below  $c$  by time  $t$ . And Bachelier concludes: "It is remarkable that the multiple integral that expresses the probability  $\mathbb{P}(M_t > c)$  does not seem amenable to ordinary methods of calculation, but can be determined by very simple probabilistic reasoning." It was, without doubt, the first example of the use of the reflection principle in probability theory. In two steps, a complicated calculation yields a simple formula by using a very simple probabilistic (or combinatorial) argument.

Of course. Bachelier had to do his mathematics without a safety net. What could his safety net have been? The mathematical analysis available during his time could not deal with such strange objects and calculations. It was not until the following year, 1901, that Lebesgue introduced the integral based on the measure that Borel had just recently constructed. The Daniell integral, which Wiener used, dates to 1920 and it was not until the 1930s that European mathematicians realized that computing probabilities with respect to Brownian motion, or with respect to sequences of independent random variables, could be done using Lebesgue measure on the unit interval. Since Lebesgue's theory came to be viewed as one of the strongest pillars of analysis in the twentieth century, this approach gave probability theory a very strong analytic basis. We will have to wait much longer to place the stochastic calculus of Brownian motion and sample path arguments involving stopping times into a relatively uniform analytical framework. Anyway, Bachelier had little concern for either this new theory in analysis or the work of his contemporaries, whom he never cites. He refers to the work of Laplace, Bertrand, and Poincaré, who never cared about the Lebesgue integral, and so Bachelier always ignored its existence.

It seems that in 1900, Bachelier [1] saw very clearly how to model the continuous movement of stock prices and he established new computational techniques, derived notably from the classical techniques involving infinite sequences of fair coin flips. He provided an intermediate mathematical argument to explain a new class of functions that reflected the vagaries of the market, just as in the eighteenth century, when one used geometric reasoning and physical intuition to explain things.

#### After the Thesis

His Ph.D. thesis defended, Bachelier suddenly seemed to discover the immensity of a world in which randomness exists. The theory of the stock market allowed him to view the classical results of probability with a new eye, and it opened new viewpoints for him. Starting in 1901, Bachelier showed that the known results about infinite sequences of fair coin flips could all (or almost all) be obtained from stock

market theory and that one can derive new results that are more precise than anyone had previously suspected. In 1906, Bachelier proposes an almost general theory of "related probabilities", that is to say, a theory about what would, 30 years later, be called *Markov processes*. This article by Bachelier was the starting point of a major study by Kolmogorov in 1931 that we already mentioned. All of Bachelier's work was published with the distant but caring recommendation of Poincare, so that by 1910, Bachelier, ´ whose income remains unknown and was probably modest, is permitted to teach a "free course" in probability theory at the Sorbonne, without compensation. Shortly thereafter, he won a scholarship that allowed him to publish his *Calculus of Probability*, Volume I, Paris, Gauthier-Villars, 1912 (Volume II never appeared), which included all of his work since his thesis. This very surprising book was not widely circulated in France, and had no impact on the Paris stock market or on French mathematics, but it was one of the sources that motivated work in stochastic processes at the Moscow School in the 1930s. It also influenced work by the American School on sums of independent random variables in the 1950s, and at the same time, influenced new theories in mathematical finance that were developing in the United States. And, as things should rightly be, these theories traced back to France, where Bachelier's name had become so well recognized that in 2000, the centennial anniversary of his work in "theory of speculation" was celebrated.

The First World War interrupted the work of Bachelier, who was summoned for military service in September 1914 as a simple soldier. When the war ended in December 1918, he was a sublieutenant in the Army Service Corps. He served far from the front, but he carried out his service with honor. As a result, in 1919, the Directorate of Higher Education in Paris believed it was necessary to appoint Bachelier to a university outside of Paris, since the war had decimated the ranks of young French mathematicians and there were many positions to be filled. After many difficulties, due to his marginalization in the French mathematical community and the incongruent nature of his research, Bachelier finally received tenure in 1927 (at the age of 57) as a professor at the University of Besan¸con, where he remained until his retirement in 1937. Throughout the postwar years,

Bachelier essentially did not publish any original work. He married in 1920, but his wife died a few months later. He was often ill and he seems to have been quite isolated.

In 1937, he moved with his sister to Saint-Malo in Brittany. During World War II, he moved to Saint-Servan, where he died in 1946. He seemed to be aware of the new theory of stochastic processes that was then developing in Paris and Moscow, and that was progressively spreading all over the world. He attempted to claim credit for the things that he had done, without any success. He regained his appetite for research, to the point that in 1941, at the age of 70, he submitted a note for publication to the Academy of Sciences in Paris on the "probability of maximum oscillations", in which he demonstrated a fine mastery of the theory of Brownian motion, which was undertaken systematically by Paul Levy starting in 1938. Paul Levy, the principal French researcher of the theory of Brownian motion, recognized, albeit belatedly, the work of Bachelier, and his work provided a more rigorous foundation for Bachelier's "theory of speculation".

## **Reference**

[1] Bachelier, L. (1900). Theorie de la sp ´ eculation, Th ´ ese ` Sciences mathematiques Paris. ´ *Annales Scientifiques de l'Ecole Normale Sup´erieure* **17**, 21–86; *The Random Character of Stock Market Prices*, P. Cootner, ed, MIT Press, Cambridge, 1964, pp. 17–78.

## **Further Reading**

- Courtault, J.M. & Kabanov, Y. (eds) (2002). *Louis Bachelier: Aux origines de la Finance Math´ematique*, Presses Universitaires Franc-Comtoises, Besan¸con.
- Taqqu, M.S. (2001). Bachelier and his times: a conversation with Bernard Bru, *Finance and Stochastics* **5**(1), 3–32.

## **Related Articles**

**Black–Scholes Formula**; **Markov Processes**; **Martingales**; **Option Pricing: General Principles**.

BERNARD BRU