# **REVIEW OF ADMINISTRATIVE ACTION**

### PRATEEK JALAN AND RITIN RAI \*

#### **I. INTRODUCTION**

THE inclusion of a chapter on administrative review in a handbook on the Indian Constitution may at first blush appear misplaced (and indeed, in many jurisdictions, it perhaps would be). However, in the context of the Indian Constitution, the concept of administrative review derives from substantive constitutional provisions, and its scope takes colour from the great body of jurisprudence that has grown around the fundamental rights guaranteed in **Part III** of the Constitution. This is because **Part III** opens with the definition of 'State' in Article 12, and makes no distinction between the legislative and administrative branches of government. Similarly, Article 13, which provides that 'laws' which take away or abridge fundamental rights will be void, defines 'laws' to include not just legislation but also instruments of executive administration, such as orders, by-laws, rules, and notifications. Thus, as far as the text of the Constitution is concerned, there is no distinction between the rights of a citizen in the context of legislative action and in respect of the executive functions of the government. In the sphere of administrative review, the Supreme Court's attention has been focused on the width of the concept of 'reasonableness' derived from the equality guarantee in Article 14 of the Constitution and this chapter explores the development of this concept in the context of the Court's administrative review judgments.

Although the Supreme Court, as early as 1967, observed that 'the scope of Article 14 has been so well settled that it does not require further elucidation',<sup>1</sup> unfortunately time has proven the Court wrong. Article 14 has continued to generate a large volume of case law, which sits in sharp contrast to the directness and brevity of its language. The requirement of 'reasonableness' has been described as 'an essential element of equality or non-arbitrariness [which] pervades Article 14 like a brooding omnipresence'.<sup>2</sup> This chapter first examines whether the grounds of judicial review under Article 14 apply to the same extent when considering the validity of legislation compared with administrative action. It then examines the scope of the power of administrative review under the concept of 'reasonableness' and whether this concept has been applied consistently. It concludes that the inherently abstract and imprecise nature of the concept of 'reasonableness' has led to the lack of a judicially manageable test or standard by which to analyse the diverse cases that the Court has been called upon to adjudicate. We then examine whether it is more appropriate to understand the judgments of the Court with reference to the nature of the power being exercised by the executive and the manner in which this may influence an adjudication of reasonableness. In conclusion, we suggest that the Court is in fact taking the nature of the power into account while deciding the various cases that it is confronted with, but that its judgments do not always enunciate that approach as explicitly as they can.

#### **II. IS ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW DIFFERENT FROM LEGISLATIVE REVIEW?**

Judicial review of the 'reasonableness' of all government action—whether administrative or legislative—is rooted in Article 14 of the Constitution. The first and foremost question which therefore arises is whether there is any distinction in the level of scrutiny courts would adopt while adjudicating on the validity of administrative actions as compared with legislation. The distinction between executive and legislative actions has been highlighted in a number of Supreme Court decisions, including in *Maneka Gandhi*. There the Court noted that '[o]fficial arbitrariness is more subversive of the doctrine of equality than statutory discrimination. In respect of a statutory discrimination one knows where he stands, but the wand of official arbitrariness can be waved in all directions indiscriminately<sup>2</sup>.<sup>3</sup> Although it is not entirely clear why arbitrariness or inequality perpetuated by one branch of the State should be less problematic than that propagated by another, this view is perhaps premised on a conception of parliamentary supremacy, which the Court was seeking to reconcile with the fact that the mandate of Article 14 applies to all branches of the State equally.

Despite this distinction recognised by the Court, judgments are not consistent as to the width of the difference. This is evident from an analysis of the Court's jurisprudence on the grounds upon which legislation can be struck down for want of compliance with Article 14. Although a constitutional bench of the Supreme Court had a recent opportunity to clarify the law on this aspect, unfortunately its decision does not satisfactorily reconcile earlier judgments. $\frac{4}{3}$  The reference to the constitutional bench arose in the context of two distinct lines of precedent. One line mandated a limited scope of Article 14 review of legislation, confined to questions of classification and excessive delegation of power. The other line of decisions suggested a far greater degree of scrutiny, touching upon the substantive 'reasonableness' of the legislative provision or act under challenge.

Although the first line of authority required considerable deference to be accorded to legislative decision making, it held differently in this regard. In *State of Andhra Pradesh v McDowell & Co*, for example, the Court held that the scope of judicial review is restricted to (a) legislative competence; (b) violation of fundamental rights guaranteed in **Part III** of the Constitution; and (c) violation of any other provision of the Constitution.<sup>5</sup> However, in view of the fact that questions of reasonableness could certainly be brought within these parameters, the Court cautioned that an enactment cannot be struck down by a mere finding that it is arbitrary or unreasonable and that 'some or other constitutional infirmity has to be found before invalidating an Act'.<sup>6</sup> Although the Court's reasoning is somewhat tautological (because a more expansive scope of review could indeed have resulted in a finding of constitutional infirmity by reason of breach of Article 14), the *McDowell* judgment is instructive regarding the scope of Article 14 review in the case of administrative decisions. The Court held that, even in the case of administrative action, the scope of judicial review is limited to three grounds, namely, (a) unreasonableness or irrationality; (b) illegality; and (c) procedural impropriety. The Court described the applicability of the doctrine of proportionality in administrative law as 'yet a debatable issue',<sup>7</sup> and therefore ruled out its applicability as a ground for striking down legislation. <sup>8</sup> Another constitutional bench of the Supreme Court in *Ashoka Kumar Thakur*, while dealing with reservations in educational institutions, held that unreasonableness 'by itself' does not constitute a ground for invalidating legislation and that '[t]he validity of a constitutional amendment and the validity of plenary legislation have to be decided purely as questions of constitutional law'.<sup>2</sup> The same approach was adopted by another constitutional bench in *KT Plantation*, where the Court

articulated the underlying premise of parliamentary supremacy:

Plea of unreasonableness, arbitrariness, proportionality, etc. always raises an element of subjectivity on which a court cannot strike down a statute or a statutory provision, especially when the right to property is no more a fundamental right. Otherwise the court will be substituting its wisdom to that of the legislature, which is impermissible in our constitutional democracy.<sup>10</sup>

In contrast with this line of decisions is another significant body of case law that indicates that, even while adjudicating upon the validity of legislative provisions, the Court has in fact entered upon a substantive review of the 'reasonableness' of the statute. In *Ajay Hasia v Khalid Mujib Sehravardi*, 11 Bhagwati J, speaking for a constitutional bench, implicitly equated the level of Article 14 scrutiny in cases of executive and legislative actions. In the Court's words, 'Wherever therefore there is arbitrariness in State action whether it be of the legislature or of the executive or of an "authority" under Article 12, Article 14 immediately springs into action and strikes down such State action.<sup>'12</sup>

Several other judgments also exemplify this approach. For example, in *Mardia Chemicals v Union* of *India*,<sup>13</sup> the challenge was to various provisions of the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act 2002. While striking down the statutory requirement of a pre-deposit as a condition of appeal, the Supreme Court entered into an assessment of the reasonableness of the substantive provision, holding it to be 'unreasonable, arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution'. 14 In *Malpe Vishwanath Acharya v State of Maharashtra*,<sup>15</sup> the Court struck down the standard rent provision of a rent control legislation passed in 1947 as it had become unreasonable with the passage of time. In *Virender Singh Hooda v State of* Haryana,<sup>16</sup> the Court adopted the test of whether the statutory provision would be 'unreasonable, harsh, arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution'.<sup>17</sup> Other formulations of the test are in terms of 'substantive unreasonableness' and 'manifest arbitrariness' of the statute.<sup>18</sup> Although the precise test in each of these decisions is worded differently, they indicate a scope of review that involves adjudication upon the merits of the legislative provision.<sup>19</sup>

Faced with these inconsistencies, a three-judge bench of the Supreme Court in *Subramanian Swamy v Director, Central Bureau of Investigation 20* referred this question for the consideration of a constitutional bench. In that case, the Court was concerned with a challenge to the constitutional validity of Section 6A of the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act 1946, which required the Central Bureau of Investigation to obtain Union government sanction before conducting an inquiry or investigation into any alleged offence committed under the Prevention of Corruption Act 1988, if the officer concerned was of the rank of Joint Secretary or above. The decisions in *Mardia Chemicals, Ajay Hasia*, and *Malpe Vishwanath Acharya* were amongst those cited before the three-judge bench. It held that the question of 'whether arbitrariness and unreasonableness or manifest arbitrariness and unreasonableness, being facets of Article 14 of the Constitution of India are available or not as grounds to invalidate a legislation<sup> $21$ </sup> was required to be finally decided by the constitutional bench.

Answering the reference, the constitutional bench has recently held that the only grounds on which legislation can be struck down under Article 14 are (a) improper classification; and (b) excessive delegation of power.<sup>22</sup> While striking down the legislative provision (on the ground that the classification of officers by rank bore no rational nexus to the objectives of the statute in question), the Court referred to the 'presumption of constitutionality of an enactment' and 'the fundamental nature and importance of the legislative process',  $\frac{23}{2}$  and cautioned as follows:

The Court also needs to be mindful that a legislation does not become unconstitutional merely because there is another view or

because another method may be considered to be as good or even more effective, like any issue of social, or even economic policy. It is well settled that the courts do not substitute their views on what the policy is.  $24$ 

Unfortunately, however, the constitutional bench in *Subramanian Swamy* has proceeded on a consideration of only those authorities which mandated a limited scope of review of legislative acts, and has not referred to any of the inconsistent decisions in order to resolve the conflicting approaches which the order of reference expressly acknowledged. Therefore, while this decision, having been rendered by a constitutional bench, may guide the Court in applying a comprehensible framework for deciding future cases involving legislative challenges, the limited analysis represents a missed opportunity to clarify and reconcile the Court's precedents on this point. The Court did not shed any new light upon whether a meaningful distinction exists between adjudicating challenges to legislation, on the one hand, and administrative action, on the other. The observation of the earlier constitutional bench in *Ajay Hasia* having also been overlooked, it is likely that *Subramanian Swamy* is not the last word on this subject. At present, however, the decision implies that all other grounds of judicial review under Article 14 are available only when an administrative act is under challenge.

### **III. GROUNDS OF ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW**

The power of a court to review administrative action on the grounds that the action is 'unreasonable' or 'arbitrary' and therefore hit by the equality promise enshrined in Article 14 is now well established. This section examines the contours and meaning of that power and whether it has been consistently applied.

The proposition that a decision that is arbitrary is necessarily unequal was articulated in three seminal decisions authored by Bhagwati J. The first of these, *EP Royappa v State of Tamil Nadu*, 25 dealt with a challenge by an Indian Administrative Service officer to an order transferring him to a temporary post. Bhagwati J, speaking for the Court, rejected the challenge and explained the scope and reach of Article 14 as follows:

Equality is a dynamic concept with many aspects and dimensions and it cannot be 'cribbed, cabined and confined' within traditional and doctrinaire limits. From a positivistic point of view, equality is antithetic to arbitrariness. In fact equality and arbitrariness are sworn enemies; one belongs to the rule of law in a republic while the other, to the whim and caprice of an absolute monarch. Where an act is arbitrary, it is implicit in it that it is unequal both according to political logic and constitutional law and is therefore violative of Article 14, and if it affects any matter relating to public employment, it is also violative of Article 16. Articles 14 and 16 strike at arbitrariness in State action and ensure fairness and equality of treatment.<sup>26</sup>

Four years thereafter, in *Maneka Gandhi*, Bhagwati J also authored the lead judgment, noting that '[t]he principle of reasonableness, which legally as well as philosophically, is an essential element of equality or non-arbitrariness, pervades Article 14 like a brooding omnipresence'.<sup>27</sup> In the third judgment in this series, *Ramana Dayaram Shetty v International Airport Authority of India*, 28 Bhagwati J found that the principle that Article 14 strikes at arbitrariness was 'now well-settled'. $\frac{29}{2}$ 

After these three judgments, the concept of 'unreasonableness' was further explained in *GB Mahajan v Jalgaon Municipal Council*, <sup>30</sup> where the Court was faced with a challenge to the manner in which a governmental authority sought to finance a project. *Ramana Dayaram Shetty* was relied upon and the Court noted that there is 'general misapprehension of the scope of the "reasonableness" test in administrative law' and that 'some phrases which pass from one branch of law to another …

carry over with them meanings that may be inapposite in the changed context'. $\frac{31}{1}$  In the context of the term 'reasonableness', the Court reproduced the following observation of Frankfurter J in *Tiller v Atlantic Coast Line Rail Road Company*:

A phrase begins life as a literary expression; its felicity leads to its lazy repetition; and repetition soon establishes it as a legal formula, undiscriminatingly used to express different and sometimes contradictory ideas.<sup>32</sup>

The Court, thereafter, contrasting the administrative law test of reasonableness with the test of reasonableness under tort law, explained the administrative law test. In its view the standard of reasonableness in administrative law, quoting Professor Wade, was:

[T]he standard indicated by a true construction of the Act which distinguishes between what the statutory authority may or may not be authorized to do. It distinguishes between proper use and improper abuse of power. It is often expressed by saying that the decision is unlawful if it is one to which no reasonable authority could have come.<sup>33</sup>

This is understood as the essence of the Wednesbury unreasonableness test. Three years later, the Supreme Court delivered its judgment in *Tata Cellular v Union of India*, <sup>34</sup> which is generally regarded as laying down the scope of judicial review of administrative action. In this case, the Court considered a challenge to the manner in which licences were granted by the Department of Telecommunications to private players to offer cellular mobile telephone services. The Court noted that its role was limited to considering the manner in which decisions had been taken, and did not extend to considering whether a particular policy or particular decision taken in the fulfilment of that policy was fair. The grounds on which administrative action is subject to control by judicial review were identified as:

(i) Illegality: this means the decision-maker must understand correctly the law that regulates his decision-making power and must give effect to it.

- (ii) Irrationality, namely, Wednesbury unreasonableness.
- (iii) Procedural impropriety.<sup>35</sup>

However, despite restricting the ground of challenge to 'irrationality, namely, Wednesbury unreasonableness',  $\frac{36}{10}$  the Court expanded this to state that the decision 'must not only be tested by the application of the Wednesbury principle of reasonableness (including its other facets pointed out above) but must be free from arbitrariness'. 37 It is also worth noting that the decision in *Tata Cellular* did not cite the three aforementioned decisions of the Court authored by Bhagwati J, rendering an organised analysis of the scope of judicial review of administrative action under Article 14 problematic.

The decision in *Tata Cellular* is commonly cited as the authority which sets out the grounds on which administrative action is tested on the touchstone of Article 14. However, the contours and scope of the grounds established in that judgment as regards 'irrationality, namely Wednesbury unreasonableness' have not been carefully examined or applied. This has resulted in an uncertain body of law on the test of reasonableness (or more appropriately, unreasonableness) to be applied in administrative law. Courts have used the terms 'unreasonableness', 'irrationality', and 'arbitrariness' interchangeably. This is perhaps in part because the terms themselves are abstract in meaning and imprecise in scope. The difficulty in providing a precise and definite meaning to these terms was acknowledged in *Shrilekha Vidyarthi v State of Uttar Pradesh*:

The meaning and true import of arbitrariness is more easily visualized than precisely stated or defined. The question, whether an impugned act is arbitrary or not, is ultimately to be answered on the facts and in the circumstances of a given case. An obvious test to apply is to see whether there is any discernible principle emerging from the impugned act and if so, does it satisfy the test of reasonableness. Where a mode is prescribed for doing an act and there is no impediment in following that procedure, performance of the act otherwise and in a manner which does not disclose any discernible principle which is reasonable, may itself attract the vice of arbitrariness. Every State action must be informed by reason and it follows that an act uninformed by reason, is arbitrary. Rule of law contemplates governance by laws and not by humour, whims or caprices of the men to whom the governance is entrusted for the time being. It is trite that 'be you ever so high, the laws are above you'. This is what men in power must remember, always. 38

Five years after *Shrilekha Vidyarthi*, the same thought was expressed by Jeevan Reddy J, who referred (in a footnote in *McDowell)* to Frankfurter J's statement in *Tiller v Atlantic Coast Line Railroad Co. 39* Interestingly, this time Frankfurter J was cited with respect to the word 'arbitrary'. In the past few years, *Shrilekha* has been reiterated in *East Coast Railway v Mahadev Appa Rao 40* (in which the Court held that a failure to give reasons is a manifestation of arbitrariness), and Jeevan Reddy J's footnote has been reproduced in *Special Reference No 1 of 2012*, 41 leading us to the conclusion that the Court has (perhaps justifiably) forsaken any attempt to define an Article 14 test which is comprehensible and judicially manageable. This is borne out by the Court's decision in *Special Reference No 1 of 2012.* After referring to the development of the case law on arbitrariness as a facet of judicial review under Article 14, the Court noted that it 'has also alerted against the arbitrary use of the "arbitrariness" doctrine<sup> $42$ </sup> and that '[s]ome decisions have commented on the doctrinal looseness of the arbitrariness test and tried keeping its folds within permissible boundaries'.<sup>43</sup> However, in its conclusion, the Court ultimately found an impossibly wide range of principles inherent in the fundamental concept of Article 14, stating as follows:

The [State] action has to be fair, reasonable, non-discriminatory, transparent, non-capricious, unbiased, without favouritism or nepotism, in pursuit of promotion of healthy competition and equitable treatment. It should conform to the norms which are rational, informed with reasons and guided by public interest, etc. All these principles are inherent in the fundamental conception of Article 14.<sup>44</sup>

Another aspect that is unclear in the test of irrationality in the *Tata Cellular* judgment is whether and to what extent the 'doctrine of proportionality' applies. Although in *Jai Bhagwan v Commissioner of* Police,<sup>45</sup> the Supreme Court concluded that the doctrine of proportionality had been gradually accepted as a facet of judicial review, beginning with the Court's decision in *Ranjit Thakur v Union of India*, 46 the issue bears closer examination. A close reading of *Ranjit Thakur* reveals that, while the Court included the doctrine of proportionality in the concept of judicial review, it did not explain the doctrine. In fact, the Court applied the test of Wednesbury unreasonableness in the case to set aside the order under challenge. 47 It is perhaps for this reason that in *McDowell*, the Court observed that '[t]he applicability of doctrine of proportionality even in administrative law sphere is yet a debatable issue'.<sup>48</sup>

Yet the Court struck a different note in *Union of India v G Ganayutham*. <sup>49</sup> Jagannadha Rao J analysed the earlier decision in *Ranjit Thakur* and concluded that although the doctrine of proportionality was referred to, the Court arrived at its decision by applying irrationality in the sense understood by earlier decisions (ie, by applying Wednesbury unreasonableness).<sup>50</sup> He concluded, also based on *Tata Cellular* and *McDowell*, that it is still debatable whether proportionality is part of our administrative law. The Court in *Ganayutham* examined the issue of whether the doctrine of proportionality applied or whether the principle of Wednesbury unreasonableness still held the field. It noted that:

Whether in the case of administrative or executive action affecting fundamental freedoms, the courts in our country will apply the principle of 'proportionality' and assume a primary role, is left open, to be decided in an appropriate case where such action is alleged to offend fundamental freedoms. It will be then necessary to decide whether the courts will have a primary role only if the freedoms under Articles 19, 21 etc. are involved and not for Article 14.<sup>51</sup>

Thus, even as there is a lack of clarity as to whether the doctrine of proportionality applies as a facet of arbitrariness under Article 14 to test administrative decisions, there is also considerable doubt as to whether it replaces the principle of Wednesbury unreasonableness or coexists with it. In *State of Madhya Pradesh v Hazarilal*,<sup>52</sup> the Supreme Court observed that 'the legal parameters of judicial review have undergone a change. Wednesbury principle of unreasonableness has been replaced by the doctrine of proportionality.' <sup>53</sup> On the contrary, in *Chairman, All India Railway Recruitment Board v* K Shyam Kumar,  $\frac{54}{5}$  the Court was of the opinion that 'it is not safe to conclude that the principle of Wednesbury unreasonableness has been replaced by the doctrine of proportionality' and that both tests were to be applied simultaneously.<sup>55</sup>

There is therefore considerable lack of clarity on the test to be applied to challenge administrative decisions under Article 14. The contours of the term 'irrationality' (as used in *Tata Cellular*) are unclear for the reasons discussed above—the term is used interchangeably with other terms such as 'unreasonable' and 'arbitrary' and the Court has acknowledged the difficulty in defining the term. Further, it is also unclear whether irrationality has to be understood only in a Wednesbury sense, or whether it now encompasses a doctrine of proportionality. This lack of a judicially manageable test or standard becomes evident from an analysis of the Court's decisions on some of the specific elements that have been held to constitute facets of arbitrariness or irrationality. Two examples should suffice.

## **1. 'Undue Haste' as a Ground of Review**

In two relatively recent decisions, the Court has indicated that 'undue haste' in decision making can lead to an adverse inference being drawn against the authorities.<sup>56</sup> Had quick decision making per se led the Court to a presumption of *mala fides*, that would have been a startling comment both on the normal pace of government action, and on the suspicion attracted by the institutions of governance in India. However, a scrutiny of other judgments indicates that a decision made with unexpected haste would be quashed only if there are other attendant circumstances to demonstrate lack of bona fides or some other independent ground of review. For example, in *D Sudhakar (2) v DN Jeevaraju <sup>57</sup>* and *Balchandra L Jarkiholi v BS Yeddyurappa*, 58 the decision of the Speaker of a Legislative Assembly to disqualify members under the anti-defection provisions of the Constitution were quashed on the ground of denial of natural justice, which resulted in a hasty decision. Similarly, in *Bahadursinh Lakhubhai Gohil v Jagadishbhai M Kamalia*, 59 the Court quashed a decision of a newly appointed minister to grant a lease of land to a private person, citing the short period he was in office, presumably on the ground that this shows non-application of mind.

In *Chairman & MD, BPL Ltd v SP Gururaja*, 60 the Court has also expressly held that haste can be a ground for review only when the impugned action is held to be mala fide. <sup>61</sup> Further, the Court noted
that:

The question as to whether any undue haste has been shown in taking an administrative decision is essentially a question of fact … A decision which has been taken after due deliberations and upon due application of mind cannot be held to be suffering from malice in law on the ground that there had been undue haste on the part of the State and the Board.<sup>62</sup>

This argument is a circular one: if an action is taken in haste, it is liable to be quashed because it is presumed to be mala fide, but it can be quashed on this ground only if it is mala fide. Ultimately, the only possible resolution of this conundrum perhaps lies in the almost ironic observation of Mukharji J, in *Narendra Kumar Maheshwari v Union of India, 63* that '[s]peed is good; haste is bad, and it is always desirable to bear in mind that one should hasten slowly. However, whether in a particular case, there was haste or speed depends upon the objective situation or on overall appraisement of the situation.'<sup>64</sup>

## **2. Promissory Estoppel**

The applicability of the doctrine of promissory estoppel to administrative law was established fairly early in our constitutional jurisprudence.<sup>65</sup> Later judgments have located this ground of challenge in Article 14. <sup>66</sup> The scope of the doctrine of promissory estoppel was explained by the Court in *Motilal Padampat Sugar Mills Co Ltd v State of Uttar Pradesh*. <sup>67</sup> Upholding the challenge to the withdrawal of a sales tax exemption on the ground that the petitioner had set up an industry relying upon the representation of the authorities that the exemption would be available for a fixed period, Bhagwati J described the doctrine as derivative of the rule of law:

It is indeed the pride of constitutional democracy and rule of law that the Government stands on the same footing as a private individual so far as the obligation of the law is concerned: the former is equally bound as the latter. It is indeed difficult to see on what principle can a Government, committed to the rule of law, claim immunity from the doctrine of promissory estoppel... why should the Government not be held to a high standard of rectangular rectitude while dealing with its citizens?<sup>68</sup>

However, despite the lofty ideals upon which the doctrine was held to rest, the Court provided for a 'public interest' exception. In the words of the Court:

When the Government is able to show that in view of the facts as have transpired since the making of the promise, public interest would be prejudiced if the Government were required to carry out the promise, the Court would have to balance the public interest in the Government carrying out a promise made to a citizen which has induced the citizen to act upon it and alter his position and the public interest likely to suffer if the promise were required to be carried out by the Government and determine which way the equity lies.<sup>69</sup>

This 'overriding public interest' exception recognised in *Motilal Padampat* has been used in subsequent cases to dilute the scope of the doctrine. <sup>70</sup> A case in point (factually similar to *Motilal Padampat*) is *Shree Sidhbali Steels Pvt Ltd v State of Uttar Pradesh*, <sup>71</sup> wherein the Court upheld the withdrawal of a power tariff rebate (granted as an incentive for industrialisation of hill areas), reverting to a more restrictive scrutiny attracted by policy decisions and based on classification.

These illustrations suggest that the Court's Article 14 jurisprudence cannot be explained by enumerating a catalogue of tests or indicia that are predictable and consistent. The Court itself has eschewed a doctrinaire approach and favoured a more flexible method of adjudication based on 'the

facts and circumstances of the case'. While this is understandable given the tremendous diversity of situations to which the Article extends, it does not lend itself to any meaningful analysis by applying tests or indicia alone.

## **IV. THE FORMS OF ADMINISTRATIVE ACTIONS**

In this context, perhaps the judgments of the Supreme Court can be more clearly understood by classifying them according to the form of administrative action. The range of executive actions giving rise to Article 14 claims is vast—from the general (eg, challenges to delegated legislation, economic policy decisions, etc) to the specific (eg, grant of licences, withdrawal of benefits, personal liberty cases, and public service cases). An analysis of the decisions along these lines suggests that the Court generally (but not always) accords a higher level of deference to the authorities in the former category and exercises greater scrutiny in the latter.

This distinction is expressly acknowledged in *Union of India v Cynamide India Ltd*, <sup>72</sup> which concerned price fixation in relation to drugs. While holding that price fixation would ordinarily attract a relatively low level of Article 14 scrutiny, Chinnappa Reddy J distinguished cases of price fixation which are legislative (ie, of general application) from those which are quasi-judicial or administrative in character, where a more thorough scrutiny would be justified (such as specific cases of acquisition or requisition of property).<sup> $73$ </sup> Another example of this tendency to distinguish different types of actions is in relation to delegated legislation, where the Court appears to take an approach that is closer to the scope of challenge of plenary legislation than of other administrative actions. In *Indian Express Newspapers v Union of India*, 74 the Court held that subordinate legislation does not carry the same degree of immunity which is enjoyed by a statute passed by a competent legislature, and (in addition to the grounds of challenge available in the case of plenary legislation) may also be questioned on the ground that it does not conform to the statute under which it is made or that it is contrary to some other statute. However, with respect to a challenge on the ground of unreasonableness, the Court adopted tests similar to those laid down for plenary legislation, namely 'manifest arbitrariness', $\frac{75}{12}$  or that it is 'so arbitrary that it could not be said to be in conformity with the statute or that it offends Article 14 of the Constitution'.  $\frac{76}{6}$  In this context, the Court also held that, unlike administrative actions, delegated legislation cannot be challenged on natural justice grounds. The Court's application of differing standards of scrutiny, dependent upon classification of administrative acts by the generality of their application, becomes apparent from the following passage in its judgment:

A distinction must be made between delegation of a legislative function in the case of which the question of reasonableness cannot be enquired into and the investment by statute to exercise particular discretionary powers. In the latter case the question may be considered on all grounds on which administrative action may be questioned, such as, non-application of mind, taking irrelevant matters into consideration, failure to take relevant matters into consideration, etc. etc. On the facts and circumstances of a case, a subordinate legislation may be struck down as arbitrary or contrary to statute if it fails to take into account very vital facts which either expressly or by necessary implication are required to be taken into consideration by the statute or, say, the Constitution. This can only be done on the ground that it does not conform to the statutory or constitutional requirements or that it offends Article 14 or Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution. It cannot, no doubt, be done merely on the ground that it is not reasonable or that it has not taken into account relevant circumstances which the Court considers relevant.<sup>17</sup>

More recently, in *JK Industries v Union of India*, 78 the Court elaborated upon *Indian Express* and

held that a challenge to the vires of subordinate legislation should be answered by asking whether the power given to the rule-making authority has been used for the purpose for which it was given. The approach of the Court was clear from its observation that it would begin with a presumption that the subordinate legislation is intra vires, and read it down only if that presumption is successfully rebutted by the challenger. Another way of looking at this is to say that (a) a 'presumption of legality' operates with respect to delegated legislation (which resembles the notion of presumption of constitutionality with respect to primary statutes); and (b) that any subordinate legislation which is in conformity with the parent statute and not inconsistent with any other statute is entitled to the same level of deference as parliamentary legislation. As examined earlier in this chapter, one of the tests laid down by the Court in respect of parliamentary legislation is the test of 'manifest arbitrariness'. It is significant that exactly the same formulation has been used in respect of delegated legislation in *Indian Express* and explained in *Sharma Transport v Govt of Andhra Pradesh*, <sup>79</sup> where again the distinction between 'executive action' and 'delegated legislation' was expressly made.

The Court's response to challenges to government policy, particularly economic policy, have been of a similar effect. The disinvestment of a public sector undertaking was challenged by its employees in *BALCO Employees' Union (Regd) v Union of India*. <sup>80</sup> The challenge was repelled by the Court, holding that it was neither within the domain of the courts nor the scope of the judicial review to inquire whether a particular public policy is wise, or whether a more scientific or logical public policy can be evolved. In reaching this conclusion, the Court relied upon several precedents which dealt with primary legislation rather than executive actions, and expressly drew an analogy between deference to the 'of Parliament in enacting a law' and a policy decision of the administrative authority. <sup>81</sup> One of the judgments relied upon in *BALCO* was *State of Madhya Pradesh v Nandlal Jaiswal*. <sup>82</sup> This case concerned the liquor policy of the State of Madhya Pradesh, and here the Court had held that executive actions related to economic activities are entitled to greater latitude than those touching upon civil rights. The Court noted that the greater latitude allowed to legislation relating to economic matters must also apply in relation to executive action relating to economic activities, 'though the executive decision may not be placed on as high a pedestal as legislative judgment in so far as judicial deference is concerned'.  $83$  The Court further noted the need, even while adjudging the constitutional validity of an executive decision relating to economic matters, to grant a certain measure of freedom or 'play in the joints' to the executive, and therefore for the Court only to interfere if the policy decision is 'patently arbitrary, discriminatory or *mala fide*', <sup>84</sup> tests which are more commonly used in cases of challenges to statutes.<sup>85</sup>

An interesting case that lies at the intersection of policy and subordinate legislation is *Secretary, Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers, Govt of India v CIPLA*. <sup>86</sup> The challenge in this case was to the inclusion of certain named drugs within the scope of price control under the Drugs (Price) Control Order 1995. One of the grounds of challenge was that the drugs in question did not fall within the Span of Control defined in the Drug Policy document published by the government. Although the Court held that non-conformity with policy would not invalidate the statutory order, it did indicate that wholesale departure from the published Policy would render the order *ultra vires* Article 14 on the ground of arbitrariness. <sup>87</sup> This judgment is also thus an example of great deference being shown to the policy decision of the executive, but a far greater degree of scrutiny being employed when that policy is sought to be applied in particular cases.

In apparent contrast to these cases is *Nandini Sundar v State of Chhattisgarh*, <sup>88</sup> where the Court passed a series of directions against the Union of India and the State of Chhattisgarh with regard to measures to deal with Left-wing extremism in the State. The first section of the Court's judgment contains an elaborate articulation of political and economic philosophy, which can be presumed to have informed the Court's ultimate decision. However, even in that case, the Court's operative Article 14 reasoning was principally fashioned in traditional classification/equality terminology, perhaps revealing its inherent discomfort with a more substantive scope of review. The Court held that appointing tribal youth with little education as Special Police Officers engaged in counterinsurgency activities is violative of Article 14 and Article 21. It was violative of Article 14 as subjecting such youth to the same levels of dangers as members of the regular force with better educational backgrounds, training, and capacity to benefit from the training is 'irrational, arbitrary and capricious'.<sup>89</sup> It was violative of the Article 21 rights of others in society to have such illequipped youth engaged in counter-insurgency activities.  $\frac{90}{90}$  The Court also held that the practice of paying such youth an 'honorarium' and appointing them only for temporary periods were further violations of Article 14 and Article  $21.\overline{91}$ 

An examination of the Court's judgments in the field of tenders is also instructive in this regard. While the authorities have been permitted a high degree of latitude in formulating qualifications, conditions of tender, etc (which are of general application), the Court has elaborately and minutely examined the decision to award a tender to a particular bidder and demanded strict compliance with tender conditions. In the former category, the Court would examine only the questions of *mala fides* and misuse of statutory powers. Referring to the principles laid down in *Tata Cellular*, the Court has held in *Michigan Rubber (India) Ltd v State of Karnataka*, 92 that in fixation of the value of a tender, determination of tender conditions and award of a tender, the executive is entitled to great latitude, subject to proven arbitrariness, unreasonableness, malice, misuse of statutory powers, or prejudice to the public interest.

In *Association of Registration Plates v Union of India*<sup>93</sup> and *Shimit Utsch India Private Ltd v* West Bengal Transport Infrastructure Development Corporation Ltd, <sup>94</sup> the Court was concerned with tenders for the supply of high-security registration plates for vehicles. In the first decision, the Court dismissed a challenge to tender conditions on the ground that they favoured a party that had entered into a foreign collaboration, holding that the grounds of review are limited, and that the said decision was not vitiated by mala fides. However, some of the States subsequently changed these tender conditions, and a fresh challenge was mounted. Consistent with its restrictive approach, the Court held in the second decision that the authorities were free to cancel the tender and change the conditions, subject only to the test of mala fides and misuse of statutory power. The Court has expressly distinguished between the authority's duty to adhere to tender conditions and the power to cancel the tender process altogether in light of a new policy. The Court held that while the tendering authority is bound to give effect to essential conditions of eligibility in a tender document, it still has administrative discretion to cancel the entire tender process to give effect to a new policy in public interest so long as such action is not brought about by ulterior motives or otherwise vitiated by arbitrariness or irrationality or by way of a violation of statutory law.<sup>95</sup>

While authorities are given this latitude in formulating tender conditions, the Court has been consistent in requiring adherence to the conditions once framed, and has entered into fairly detailed scrutiny of such administrative decisions. In *Tata Cellular <sup>96</sup>* and *New Horizons Ltd v Union of India*,<sup>97</sup> for example, the Court entered into a substantive review of the administrative decision regarding qualification of a bidder. Similarly, in *West Bengal State Electricity Board v Patel Engineering*<sup>98</sup>, the Court upheld the decision of the authorities not to permit a bidder to rectify

mistakes in its bid document, holding that permitting any relaxation of the tender conditions would 'provide scope for discrimination, arbitrariness and favouritism which are totally opposed to the rule of law and our constitutional values'.  $\frac{99}{9}$  Even where power to relax or waive a rule or a condition exists under the applicable rules, the Court held that it has to be done strictly in compliance with those rules. Similarly, judgments in cases of allotment of land, petrol pumps, and other 'government largesse' reveal a detailed inquiry into the facts and the decision-making process, which contrasts with the delegated legislation/economic policy line of cases discussed above.<sup>100</sup>

An important qualification to this general tendency has emerged in recent times with respect to 'integrity cases'. Where the suspicions of the Court have been raised about the bona fides of governmental action or where the Court has considered it necessary to preserve institutional integrity, a far higher level of scrutiny has been undertaken. An example is *Centre for Public Interest Litigation v Union of India* (the 2G judgment). <sup>101</sup> Although the challenge here was to the government policy to open bids for spectrum allocation on a 'first-come-first-served' basis, the Court exercised a level of scrutiny not normally associated with a policy decision or a tender procedure. This can perhaps be explained by the fact that the award of spectrum was also subject to criminal investigation. <sup>102</sup> Another example is *Manohar Lal Sharma v Principal Secretary*, <sup>103</sup> where the Court set aside coal block allocations made over a period of almost twenty years by the Union government. In addition to finding that the procedure adopted in the allocation of coal blocks did not comply with mandatory provisions of the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act 1957 and the Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act 1973, the Court examined the decision-making process in light of the 'public interest' involved in the distribution of 'national wealth'. The Court concluded in forceful language that the Screening Committee (on whose recommendations the Union government acted in making coal block allocations) had 'never been consistent', 'there [was] no proper application of mind' and 'there was no transparency and guidelines have seldom guided it', 'all resulting in unfair distribution of the national wealth'.  $\frac{104}{ }$ 

The peculiar position of 'integrity institutions' has been emphasised by the Court in *Centre for Public Interest Litigation v Union of India*. <sup>105</sup> While reviewing the legality of the appointment of the Central Vigilance Commissioner, the Court held that both eligibility criteria of the candidate as well as the decision-making process leading to the recommendation are relevant. The decision to recommend, in the Court's view, has to be an informed decision, keeping in mind the important functions the Commissioner is required to perform. The Court noted that if a statutory body like the High-Powered Committee (HPC)<sup>106</sup> fails to consider the relevant material or takes into account irrelevant circumstances then its decision would stand vitiated on the ground of official arbitrariness. The HPC had to take into consideration what is good for the institution and not what is good for the candidate. And the touchstone, when institutional integrity is in question, is 'public interest' which has got to be taken into consideration by the HPC. Examples such as these demonstrate that the nature of the executive power in question is a very relevant (if not determinative) factor in the Court's adjudication of administrative review cases under Article 14 of the Constitution.

## **V. CONCLUSION**

Given the judicially acknowledged lack of precision in defining standards and parameters,

administrative review under Article 14 appears to be better classified along the nature and forms of administrative action rather than the grounds of administrative review. Broadly speaking, the level of scrutiny attracted by a more generally applicable administrative act is lower than that of an instrument that affects relatively few persons. In performing administrative review, we have seen that the Court has articulated a set of principles to adjudicate diverse challenges and then struggled to fit different levels of scrutiny within a common framework of tests and parameters, leading to inconsistencies in the application of the tests. Where some minimal degree of clarity has been achieved (such as in the approach to delegated legislation), it is by express acknowledgement and conscious appreciation of the peculiar nature of the executive act being considered. It would be in the interest of clarity and consistency to take this process further and lay down different standards of review applicable to different situations. Our analysis suggests that the body of case law already gives effect to these different standards. However, applying them within a common language of 'irrationality', 'unreasonableness', and 'arbitrariness' has led to inconsistencies in judicial pronouncements. A more transparent enunciation of the Court's perspective would be entirely logical and follows from a conscious recognition of the diversity of challenges comprehended within Article 14. This would lend clarity to the law, and perhaps take us closer to realising the Court's declaration, as far back as in 1967, that the scope of Article 14 requires no further elucidation. $\frac{107}{107}$ 

 $\frac{6}{5}$  *McDowell* & Co (<u>n 5</u>) [43].

 $^{1}$  *McDowell* & *Co* ( $\frac{n}{5}$ ) [43].

 $8$  It should be noted, however, that the applicability of proportionality as a test to examine the validity of any legislative restriction imposed upon a fundamental right was upheld even in this case. The fundamental rights guaranteed by Article 19(1) of the Constitution are subject to 'reasonable restrictions' under Articles 19(2) to 19(6). In this context, the *McDowell* judgment emphasises that adjudication of 'reasonableness' under Articles 19(2) to 19(6) would include examination under the doctrine of proportionality, whereas adjudication of 'reasonableness' in an Article 14 context would not.

<sup>9</sup> *Ashoka Kumar Thakur v Union of India* (2008) 6 SCC 1 [219].

<sup>10</sup> *KT Plantation (P) Ltd v State of Kerala* (2011) 9 SCC 1 [205].

<span id="page-12-2"></span><sup>11</sup> *Ajay Hasia v Khalid Mujib Sehravardi* (1981) 1 SCC 722.

<sup>12</sup> *Ajay Hasia* (n [11](#page-12-2)) [16].

<span id="page-12-3"></span> $\frac{13}{2}$  (2004) 4 SCC 311.

 $\frac{14}{9}$  *Mardia Chemicals* (n [13\)](#page-12-3) [64]. The reasons for so holding, as enumerated in paragraph 64 of the judgment, clearly go beyond an examination of legislative competence, excessive delegation, or improper classification, as suggested in the *McDowell* line of cases: see nn 8–15.

 $\frac{15}{2}$  (1998) 2 SCC 1.

<span id="page-12-4"></span> $\frac{16}{1}$  (2004) 12 SCC 588.

<sup>17</sup> *Virender Singh Hooda* (n [16](#page-12-4)) [68].

<sup>18</sup> See *Bidhannagar (Salt Lake) Welfare Assn v Central Valuation Board* (2007) 6 SCC 668 [37]; *AP Dairy Development Corporation Federation v B Narasimha Reddy* (2011) 9 SCC 286 [29].

<sup>19</sup> The test of 'manifest arbitrariness' has also been laid down in *Bombay Dyeing & Mfg Co Ltd v Bombay Environment Action Group* (2006) 3 SCC 434 [205] as the appropriate test for Article 14 review of legislation, although the Court was there concerned with subordinate legislation.

<sup>\*</sup> We are most grateful to Anurag Misra, Sadhvi Mohindru, Ankit Yadav, and Rohit Dutta for assistance in research and preparation of this chapter.

<sup>1</sup> *State of Andhra Pradesh v Nalla Raja Reddy* AIR 1967 SC 1458 [24].

<span id="page-12-0"></span><sup>2</sup> *Maneka Gandhi v Union of India* (1978) 1 SCC 248 [7].

<sup>&</sup>lt;sup>3</sup> Ma[n](#page-12-0)eka Gandhi (<u>n 2</u>) [24].

<sup>4</sup> *Subramanian Swamy v Director, Central Bureau of Investigation* (2014) 8 SCC 682.

<span id="page-12-1"></span> $\frac{5}{2}$  (1996) 3 SCC 709.