## **Federalism: Elite and Nationalities**

Himanshu Roy

his chapter discusses Indian federalism, primarily, in terms of movements launched by people in the pre-and post-independence India under the banners of different political organizations or independent of them against the 'democratic centralism' of the ruling class, and for the decentralization of power-economic and political, not in the narrow sense of the words, Centre and provinces, Union territories and autonomous councils which are merely the forms of the essence. But in a broad sense, this means that the right of the people to decide their own destiny. The chapter analyses the roles of different classes and their interests both in pre-and post-independence period. The chapter, however, presents only the broad contours of class relations between the various sections of bourgeoisie, on the one hand, and between the bourgeoisie and the masses, on the other, that are cloaked under federalism since 1935, when for the first time, it was partly actuated as a political programme. The paper does not belittle the traditional approach of looking at federalism from constitutional paradigm which has its own value.

To begin with, federalism, as we understand it today, came into existence after the emergence of capitalism as a dominant mode of production. Its formation in a given society was the result of various factors which need elucidation. But the most important out of it is the importance of market under capitalism. The treatment of society as market and individual as consumer are the requirements of capitalism for the sale of commodities. This compels the owners of commodities to be ever in search of new markets; but simultaneously, they equally require control over their old markets for the same reason as noted above. These twin necessities bring the competing bourgeoisie (unequal/equal) within a nation or of different states to a market sharing arrangement. As a result, they enter into a

written contract among themselves and set up an entire paraphernalia of state woven around it with certain powers to intervene in case of dispute. The taxes, area of market, etc., to be shared among different sections of the bourgeoisie, however, themselves depend upon their respective strengths and bargaining power. The more powerful a section, the greater the share it enjoys over the market area, taxes, etc., and the vice-versa. Here, a rider may be added while discussing the roles of various sections of bourgeoisie within a nation. In societies such as India, where capitalism arrived late on the historical scene due to many, complex, interwoven factors, there emerged two sections in the Indian bourgeoisie—oligopoly and regional. It was their economic and political strengths in the given circumstances that ultimately decided the nature of their sharing arrangement of market, taxes, etc.<sup>1</sup> In the American case, which is considered as classical, the situation was somewhat different. Beginning their history with capitalism, that too as one of the precursors and without facing the nightmare of past generations, the emergence of bourgeoisie as a class for itself was early in history. At the time of their constitution in 1787, they were untouched with the phenomenon of oligopoly versus regional. On the contrary, it were the equal, competing bourgeoisie of different sovereign states that came together to create a central executive committee with only those powers that were required to protect the collective interests of all regions, while keeping the powers of their regional committees intact, except, for those which were transferred to the centre. Therefore, even after decades of capitalist development that subsumed many powers of the region there are still substantial powers left with the regional committees. But, despite the differences between the two societies, India and the USA, the twin necessities of the bourgeoisie as enumerated earlier remain common. Coming back to the basic, the contract entered into among the bourgeoisie is, by and large, irrevocable until and unless the secessionist bourgeoisie emerge powerful enough to break away from the main body either through bullet or ballot.2 In political terms, this contract for them is called 'federalism'. It is defined as a polity where power between centre and provinces are divided through written constitution. In federalism, constitution is supreme, and where there exists an independent judiciary bestowed with the powers, granted by the constitution, to dispense justice in case of dispute either between provinces or between provinces or centre. The history, however, does not terminate here; rather it begins in the sense that the great mass of society begin to play assertive role in the body politics. Here, it will be appropriate to add that in the formation of federal polity, apart from the roles of dominant classes which are decisive, there are also other factors, such as pursuit of political power either by individuals or political parties that come into the play.

The bourgeoisie, the most enlightened class of the society, and revolutionary in character in the given period of history, helped in training the great mass of society against economic and social oppressions in their fight against feudalism and colonial capitalism. This training further sharpened by the new social milieu unleashed by capitalism, either through revolutionary technological development, socialisation of productive forces, new work culture or modern education, has now turned out to be a political Frankenstein for the bourgeoisie. The Lockean concept of democracy was compelled to shed its form under the constant onslaught of this trained mass. From 'democratic centralism' of the Lockean variety the polity turned towards democratic decentralism of the Ruosseausque variety, not wholly but considerably. The ideology of Utilitarianism and Positive Liberalism helped in 'liberalising democracy and democratising liberalism' to use Macphersonian metaphor in the early phase of mass struggle. Later on, Marxism as an ideology and praxis fixed the death knell on the Lockean form of democracy in different stages, in different societies. The bourgeoisie, however, are not a bunch of fools who granted politically decentralized polity to the masses on a platter. In fact, there have been long, arduous battles between the economic and brute coercive force of the bourgeoisie, on the one hand, and the numerical strength of the masses, on the other, for the empowerment of people. Ultimately, it was the strength of the masses that tilted the power equations in their favour, in stages, after many defeats. The bourgeoisie in the changed social milieu thought better to throw some political crumbs in order to keep their property relations intact which is primary to them. It was also designed to localise the issue rather than let it become social. Federalism, thus, an integral part and one of the forms of political democracy formed in particular circumstances become a mass reality.

In India, in its political form, it began with the Lucknow Conference of the Congress in 1916 where federalism was accepted, for the first time, as the future polity of India and was incorporated in the political and constitutional programmes. In 1920, the Congress accepted the principle of linguistic provinces<sup>3</sup> under the pressure of the nationalities, which was an indirect recognition to the nationality question that was asserting for the formation of linguistic provinces. In 1927, the Government of India and India Office were flooded with memoranda for recognition of nationalities (Oriya, Kannada, Andhara, Tamil, Bengali and Jharkhand) and formation of linguistic provinces.<sup>4</sup> They were requested to forward these memoranda to the Simon Commission which was set up to suggest the future shape of the Indian polity. Earlier, in 1921, the Madras, Bihar, and Orissa Legislative Councils had accepted, in principle, the formation of linguistic provinces.<sup>5</sup> In 1942, in the Quit Indian resolution, the Congress promised, "the largest measure of autonomy for the federating units"<sup>6</sup>. The crux came in 1946 when the Dravid Kazagham submitted a memorandum to the Cabinet Mission asking for sovereign, independent Dravidstan<sup>7</sup> and the Communist Party of India (CPI) proposed for "17 sovereign National Constituent Assemblies based on the national homelands of various Indian peoples"<sup>8</sup> and stood for "a voluntary union of national states". The Congress, too, promised for a federation based on the "willing union of its various parts", the parts themselves being constituted on the necessary homogeneity of language and culture.<sup>9</sup>After the partition and transfer of power, the Congress, however, turned renegade. It abhorred the very principle of 'willing union', 'willing partners' and linguistic provinces that it had promised in its election manifesto of 1946. Though the concept of 'willing union' was not to be decided by the plebiscitary politics at the grassroots by the Constituent Assembly dominated by the Congress which, in turn, was controlled by the High Command yet the quantum of autonomy envisaged in the manifesto was substantial. The Congress in post-partition phase opposed the concept of linguistic provinces and all that on the ground that they will fan up sub-national consciousness, the existing administrative setup is a good instrument for country's unity which has taken root like a living vital organisms and has served the useful purpose of bringing people together. It viewed the demand of linguistic provinces as separatist and disruptive tendency to be rigorously discouraged.<sup>10</sup> The States Reorganisation Commission appointed in 1953 almost reiterated the same reasons.<sup>11</sup> The mass pressure, however, compelled the government to recognize the provinces on the linguistic principle first, in 1956 and subsequently, in 1971 and in 1987.<sup>12</sup> Not only that the government was on further compelled to create different categories of Councils within the existing provinces under the series of Accords it signed with the leaders of the movements that took place from time to time in different pockets of the country the last three being the Leh, Jharkhand and Bodoland Councils.

Administratively, the process of democratic decentralization in India began from the 1892 Act when the country was a British colony. The subsequent Acts of 1909,1919 and 1935 provided further impetus to the process. The enactment of these Acts were the product of sustained mass pressure that grew under the leadership of the Congress demanding, first, political reforms, and then, *Swarajya*, and, finally, *Purna Swarajya*. Under these Acts, there was ever-increasing participation of the people in the election process as the restrictions on participation were gradually eased up under the subsequent Acts. The formation of a limited federal polity under the 1935 Act that was implemented only in the British provinces (and not at the Centre and in the princely states) was the culmination of the decentralization process in colonial India. Under this Act elections were conducted for the formation of the elected provincial government in which the Congress participated under its declared strategy of 'pressure-compromise-pressure' or 'struggle-truce-struggle'. The Act laid the essence of the federalized polity for independent India that was created between 1946-49. After 1947, except for some cosmetic changes, the substance of the 1935 Act remained the same. The most perceptible change was the right granted to all people transcending property and educational qualifications to elect representatives for governance under the Indian constitution in 1950. But in practice, even this right became a caricature as the role of muscle and money-power increased in the after-independence years. It is a well-known fact that the poor strata of rural India particularly, considerable sections of Scheduled Castes and OBCs were denied participation in electoral process. And as the standard of politics itself degenerated to the level of 'animal politics', there was nothing constitutional to safeguard even this right, except for the Moral code of Conduct of the Election Commission which, till few years ago, was a whimper. The judiciary, the branch of the executive committee has, by and large, remained only a moot spectator. Actually, the centre is so power-packed that right from altering the boundaries of the provinces to dismissing the provincial governments, and from appointing the governors, to distributing the taxes to the states it can do anything except for dissolving the masses. This situation compels the students of Indian federalism studying it from traditional approach to call it 'quasi-federalism'. Few, however, have dared to call it 'cooperative federalism'. The explanation of this dichotomy lies in understanding the social forces that shaped the constitution.

In the decades after the 1820s, the modern pan-Indian elites began to emerge on the politico-economic firmament of the country along with the elites of different nationalities in different geographical parts of the country. The Free Trade era and later on, the Industrial Age broke down the secluded village life of the pre-capitalist society and helped in the development of two simultaneous trends, pan-Indianness and nationality formation, reinforcing each other on the same plane. The formation of the nationalities in the earlier stages of the capitalist development was concentrated mainly in the coastal regions and in some other pockets of the country and from among these nationalities emerged: the members of the pan-Indian elite, but mostly dominated by Gujrati, Marwari and Parsi traders and industrialists. While "the national movement was built up by harnessing the forces of regionalism",<sup>13</sup> as the States Reorganization Commission of 1953-55 was later on to observe in its report, the nationalities pressurized the pan-Indian elites to agree to their demands and then, together they fought the British for their joint interests. The separation of Bihar and Orissa from Bengal and, later on, of Orissa from Bihar, agreement over the formation of linguistic provinces and distribution of power between centre and provinces as envisaged in the Cabinet Mission Plan were integral part of this phenomenon. Nationality formation in India, contrary to the general understanding, did not precede the pan-Indian formation. In fact, as stated here, both kinds of formations emerged simultaneously. What actually happened as a result of the uneven capitalist development was the formation of some nationalities earlier, while the others were yet to emerge which could materialize only after the post-independence era and when capitalism expanded in other backward regions. The regional, historical identities of language, culture, phyche, etc., began to coalesce under the new productive powers, economy and administrative set-up that led to the formation of nationalities. But, simultaneously under the same condition, they also began to transcend their nationality barriers. It was only then that the Congress could come into existence in 1885 which was like a United Front in which different nationalities along with the pan-Indian elites came together to fight the principal contradiction, the British, while being equally protective about their own interests. And over the years it developed into a well-knit pressurecompromise-pressure arrangement based on 'mutual convenience', as Aladi Aruna, the spokesman and the then Law Minister in the DMK government was later on to say on the autonomy of nationalities and India's unity.<sup>14</sup> Not only that the two determinants grew in strength and balanced each other till partition and transfer of power disrupted the evolving structure and helped in establishing the absolute hegemony of the pan-Indian bourgeoisie. The legacy of development till 1946, however, could not be obliterated. Pressure of nationalities, once again, started building up for concessions first, in the form of constituting linguistic provinces and various categories of Councils and second, in the demand of financial and administrative autonomy. But the most important legacy was that there was no emergence of one or a group of nationalities dominating over the rest; neither was there any constitutional administrative, political or economic discrimination against anyone based on the nationality. Even the imposition of Hindi as the official language of the country had, for all practical purposes, no impact.

All these political struggles among the two sections of the bourgeois or among the bourgeoisie of different nationalities were essentially the reflections of their economic contradictions hidden beneath the labyrinth of autonomy/secession versus centralism/unity, linguistic province vs. existing provinces, etc. In fact, politics for them was merely an instrument to be used to deliver the economic goods which were best reflected in their business associations and chambers of commerce fighting each other for the supremacy over market, trade and commerce industries, and revenue. For an instance, the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI) dominated by the pan-Indian bourgeoisie, in a communication to the Department of Planning and Development, Government of India, "opposed the principle of regionalization of industries"<sup>15</sup> and urged that the "private enterprises should be given the full freedom and facilities to establish industries in places most suitable for such development".<sup>16</sup> The Southern India Chamber of Commerce (SICCI) dominated by the Chettiars, on the other hand, "contended that economic planning should have not an all India, but a provincial basis."<sup>17</sup> It urged the Madras government, on the eve of the budget session in 1946, to "do everything possible to improve the trade and industries and help to retain as big a slice of them as possible for the benefit of the sons of the soil."<sup>18</sup> Similarly, the bourgeoisie of the Andhra nationality represented by the Andhra Chamber of Commerce resented "the indifference shown towards Andhra Commercial, industrial and banking interests by the Southern Indian Chamber of Commerce,"<sup>19</sup> represented by the Tamil bourgeoisie. The transfer of power in 1947, finally, established the supremacy of the pan-Indian bourgeoisie by providing them exclusive control over "banking, insurance, stock exchanges, petroleum, mining and airways, most initiative in industry and finace."<sup>20</sup> They, nevertheless, coopted the bourgeoisie of different nationalities, in phases, as per their strength.

The formation of nationalities and the pan-Indian community at the level of labouring masses- the hoipolloi- too began, like the bourgeoisie, simultaneously under the new productive forces, economy and administrative set up. At the one hand, the destruction of their cottage industries and uprootment from soil, their migration to towns and conversion into, mostly, wage-earners were compelling them to coalesce under the historical identities, at least, in the initial years of their new vocation, in order to fight for their livelihood against the oppressors, principally, the British; on the otherhand, their fight against the British or even against the Indian bourgeoisie was bringing them closer to other nationalities which was further accentuated by the modern transportation and the living conditions of the cities. Those who were still in the villages, too, did not remain unaffected. The gradual expansion of market economy and its impacts were constantly felt by them. Coupled with these factors, the role of the media, modern education, and the alienating role of the administration hastened the process. Consequently, from the first decade of the 20th century the pan-Indian feelings made their presence felt which were ultimately visible in the success of the political movements which, in turn, were possible only when people transcended their barriers of nationalities. But, equally important is the point that this pan-Indian feeling were still nascent and restricted to a narrow percentage of population in relation to the total strength of the country. Women in villages, tribals, outcastes, and vast sections of peasantry were still out of its fold. They were more rooted in their history, culture, language and local needs. Even the first generation wage-earners, industrial and non-industrial, had deep roots in their castes and nationalities; and it were these factors that kept on pressing the British and pan-Indian bourgeoisie not only for linguistic provinces and their autonomy/secession, but also lead to quarrels among the nationalities such, for example, as between Bengalis and Biharis in the first decade of the 20th century. Mishra and Pandey have provided a fine analysis in their book<sup>21</sup>of the various factors that led to the movement in Bihar for its separation from Bengal. One of the factors was the decline of agriculture as a source of livelihood and absence of private enterprises which could have substituted the agriculture as a source of livelihood. So the only course left for the Biharis, particularly the educated ones was to join the government service which was dominated by the Bengalis. And unless Bihar becomes a separate province they could not hope to find jobs. This was resented by Bengalis as they perceived that separation of Bihar will hamper their job prospects. Consequently, they opposed the separation of Bihar from Bengal. This led to acrimony and bitterness between the two nationalities. The second factor was the identity crisis of the Biharis who had no separate recognition independent of Bengalis. Sachidanand Sinha, one of the prominent leaders of Bihar, has given a vivid account of the humiliation he faced in England.<sup>22</sup> Bengalis too looked upon Biharis with contempt which created serious resentment among them. All these factors ultimately led to the movement for creation of a separate province of Bihar.

In the last decade of the 20th century, though the situation was vastly different from that of colonial India, but still we find a replica of the past occurring in the pockets of India which are relatively backward as they witnessed the arrival of capitalism at a later stage. It is true that under the rule of the Indian bourgeoisie, in an unequal collaboration with the Transnational Corporations, the society has made vast strides in productive forces, economy and administrative set up yet due to the uneven sectarian growth there are numerous pockets of India which are still lagging far behind either in infrastructural facilities, job opportunities or in administrative efficiency. There is no doubt that today's peasantry, wage-earners, women, tribals, dalits, etc., are no longer the same as they used to be in the 1920's or in the 1940's having undergone substantial transformation in the mobility, economic condition and consciousness, yet their condition in the tribal and hilly areas are not at par with the rest of India. They are still rooted in their historical identities. The pan-Indian feeling, which today exist in greater percentage of population and in greater geographical parts, do not sway them much. Neither the formation of the linguistic provinces, which lessened the contradictions of the older nationalities, have solved their problems. They are yet to finalize their relationships with the Indian bourgeoisie as majority of the older nationalities did. Though after the formation of the different categories of councils with different quantum of power bestowed to them, some of them have settled down with their new administrative and economic arrangements, like Gorkhas in Gorkhland, Laddakhis in Leh, etc., yet there are many who are agitating for separate provinces or seeking secession, such as United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA) in Assam, or National Socialist Council of Nagaland (NSCN) for greater Nagaland, etc. They are the new nationalities that grew in the womb of older linguistic provinces, mostly concentrated into the tribal and hilly regions of the country, towards whom we now turn our discussion to.

The development of capitalism in dimension and intensity in postcolonial India has tended to form new nationalities in the tribal and hilly areas. Earlier, these were less intensely penetrated due to the uneven economic development. These new/evolving nationalities are witnessing the same transformative processes which the older nationalities had undergone in the past as the transformative process includes the process of stratification of peasantry, their gradual uprootment from soil and conversion into wage-earners, migration to towns, etc., formation of bourgeoisie, coalescing of historical identities, changing consciousness and mobility, etc. In short, the formation of nationalities and new classes within them having varying needs are being replicated. Though at crossroads, they may not fit into the conventional Stalinist definition of nationality, but they possess the social and secular heritage of identity that binds them together, at least, during the agitation. Apart from that, there exists commonalities of economic and political interests irrespective of the varying class interests, including decentralization of power, availability of infrastructural facilities, etc., that make them stand on one platform against the hegemonic bourgeoisie. The elite among them, the medium/small scale industrialists and the various categories of business lobbies-traders, shopkeepers, transporters, etc., like their brethren's in 1946, as quoted earlier, desire "everything possible to improve the trade and industries to retain as big a slice of them as possible for the benefit of the sons of the soil". Their economic compulsion in the capitalist society compels them to seek control over market, share in surplus value, access to revenue, opportunities for capital investment and a sympathetic government of their own to attend to their grievances. Lack of such opportunities and benefits bring them into confrontation with the hegemonic bourgeoisie of different layers. Since they are economically/politically weak vis-a-vis the dominant bourgeoisie and numerically a peanut vis-a-vis peasantry and wage-earners the local bourgeoisie are unable to do anything at their own. Consequently, they turn to other strata of society for support and, in turn, include some of the demands of the masses. Not only that they prop up the historical roots to cement the cultural-identity to bind and to generate the feelings of oneness between the bourgeoisie and the masses to stand as one united body against the administration. Even crocodile tears are shed by the elite in case of causalities during the agitation. Strikes, street marches, blockades and organized violence are used to bring the hegemonic bourgeoisie to a negotiated settlement; and once they arrive at a satisfactory settlement the movement is called off. In case the settlement is not arrived at the movement lingers on interruptedly.

On the other hand, the hegemonic bourgeoisie, first, attempt to ignore or downplay the movement. But, if it gathers momentum and becomes persistent, they attempt to isolate/deflect/frustrate it by using the bogey of foreign hands or use the state power as shock absorber. Only when all these methods fail to deter the agitators they come at the negotiating table. Formation of linguistic provinces in the past, and various types of councils at present are the results of such mass pressure.

The other two important determinants in such movements are the wageearners, particularly the non-industrial urban wage-earners, and peasantry who constitute the bulk of a nationality and on whose participation or lack of it depends on the success or failure of the movements. Basically, the economic interests of wage-earners and peasantry are antagonistic to each other as they represent two different historical eras.<sup>23</sup> While the wageearners are the emerging social force, peasantry are its decaying constituents. It's only after negating the peasantry that wage-earners come into being with capitalism playing the role of the midwife. The development of capitalism, the negation of peasantry and the emergence of wage-earners are parts of the same social matrix. The essential demands of the peasantry are land to the tillers, easy credit, and accessibility to market, higher support prices for their commodities, subsidized electricity, irrigational facilities, fertilizers, seeds and all that which facilitates their working on the land. In short, they stand for land and capital to maximize their gains in order to survive in the competitive milieu, or else they would be doomed irrevocably. The wage-earners, on the other hand, seek job opportunities, better wages, less hours of work, better health and living condition, participation in management, post-retirement benefits and all that which are linked with human life. Their working condition set in the social environment of assembly line production vis-a-vis the individualistic nature of work of peasantry attached with their pieces of land makes them class-for-itself. These economic needs, nature of working conditions and world-outlooks led Marx to call peasantry a 'sack of potatoes' and wage-earners, a class that has to conquer the world. Though he was aware about the peasants' revolutionary role in history, but he equally believed that they facilitate the development of capitalism by creating the material condition for the production of wage labour; and that their existence' wrecks the proletarian revolution.

But both these constituents mediated by political organizations fight the bourgeoisie, local and hegemonic, for their varied as well as common interests, the common interests being the development of infrastructural facilities, decentralisation of power, etc. Since the local bourgeoisie themselves fight the hegemonic bourgeoisie for their class as well as common interests of the society, hence the contradictions between the local bourgeoisie and the masses get subdued for the time being and the fight between the hegemonic bourgeoisie and the entire nationality becomes the principal contradiction. The movement that ensues acquires different forms of struggle and the settlement that follows depend upon its strength. If there occurs a negotiated settlement on the demands of the nationality to the satisfaction of broad strata of society the movement is called off, or it fades out in course of time and the society relapses into its old contradictions of masses vs. local/hegemonic bourgeoisie. If the settlement does not work out to the satisfaction of the broader strata/sections of society or in absence of such settlement the movement may acquire the form of 'terrorism', as it is known in the official parlance. It may also develop into 'anti-foreigners', 'anti-outsiders' movements. Bihar in the first decade of the 20th century,<sup>24</sup> Bodoland,<sup>25</sup> Arunachal Pradesh,<sup>26</sup> Assam, etc., in recent months/years are some of the illustrative cases. In Bihar, the contradictions between different classes reflected in the form of caste struggles got subdued once the movement began for the formation of separate province. They all united, temporarily, against the British, pan-Indian bourgeoisie and Bengalis to demand a separate state of Bihar. But, once the demand materialised, their subdued contradictions came to fore as usual. In Bodoland and Assam, the movement not only became 'terroristic' but also adopted anti-Santhals and anti-Bangladeshis postures. In Arunachal Pradesh, the anti-Chakma, anti-Hazong issues have provided issues to the agitations which may acquire various proportion in the coming days.

On the constitutional side, the "prefectural federalism" that was granted by the 1935 Act and taken over by the Constituent Assembly after July 1947 with certain modifications has been described as "quasi", "cooperative-federalism", etc. To some extent, these descriptions may be true keeping in mind the practical application of development programme's, maintenance of law and order, etc., which are mainly done by the provinces. Nehru, the liberal democrat who had attended the Lucknow Conference of 1916, where for the first time federalism as a constitutional and political framework for the country was agreed upon, sparingly used Article 356, now the much abused one. All together he used this Article seven times since 1950. The rise of anti-Congress forces in subsequent years, however, not only witnessed the misuse of Article 356, but also numerous other Articles of the constitution as a tool in the hands of centre to crush the federal aspirations of the people. The 'quasi' and 'cooperative' aspects of Indian federalism as described by the constitutional experts are essentially based on the division of powers between the centre and provinces and on their smooth functioning, which normally happens when the same party is in power at both the levels. The different parties' rule at provinces and centre makes the constitutional aspect of federalism, by and large, useless, at least, in practice, particularly when provinces begin demanding greater autonomy in their functioning. The centre resorts to Articles, like 275, 282, 256, 257, 355, 288, 254 (2), etc., apart from Art 356. Even institutions, like Finance Commission, Planning Commission, etc., are used in pursuit of absolute power by the centre. In a nutshell, the unitary aspect is so pervading that constitutionally the centre can do anything with the provinces except for dissolving the people. But the fear of revolt of the people is the only restraining factor that checks the centre from moving towards absolute power. There has been no democratisation of constitution as far as the functioning of the federal aspect is concerned either in abrogation of the pernicious articles or in their lesser usages. The only change has been the addition of new amendments for the creation of new provinces out of old ones, and the abolition of categories (A, B and C) among the provinces that existed in the original constitution.

The American concept of 'indestructible union' has been the ideal of the Indian big bourgeoisie right from the pre-independence days. But the pressure of the nationalities that grew over the years demanding reorganization of provinces, autonomy or even secession compelled the big bourgeoisie to adopt, at least, the verbiage of "willing union" of "willing partners" to which they never reconciled to in practice. A weak centre with strong provinces having the right to self-determination as envisaged in the Cabinet Mission Plan were anachronism to them as this democratic structure of polity restricted their control over market, access to revenue, opportunities for capital investment and over administration to attend to their grievances. The deeds of the Muslim League on the eve of the transfer of power were a god-sent opportunity for the big bourgeoisie to strike back at the local bourgeoisie of different nationalities with the bogey of 'civil war' and loss of property. They preferred to do away with a 'moth-eaten' and 'truncated market' of Pakistan rather than to live with a weak centre and restricted market. Subsequently, the Cabinet Mission Plan was torpedoed, formation of Pakistan was agreed upon and a strong centre with overriding powers was created with no right of self-determination to nationalities. The transfer of power provided them uncontrolled leverage over the state machinery which they lacked earlier, and which was used whenever their interests were threatened. The question of compromise on secession, therefore, never entered their vocabulary.

Neither has secession been on the agenda of the masses. Had it gripped the masses and become the material force, the right to secession would have been either incorporated into the constitution or the bourgeois machinery would have been ripped apart. Since it has remained intact and the right to secession does not exist in the constitution it can safely be concluded that only a fringe population is affected by the idea of secession that are either co-opted or crushed by the bourgeoisie. However, if the right to secession is not on the agenda of the masses it does not mean that this right is not to be incorporated into the constitution. But, in the contemporary power structure, if this right is to be incorporated with a corresponding mechanism of referendum and is to be made applicable in practice, as it happened in Quebec in Canada, the nationalities with widest active participation of the masses have to jointly fight for it. The bourgeois society wouldn't hand it over to them on the platter.

## **Notes and References**

- 1. For details, see Central, State and Concurrent Lists of the Indian constitution.
- 2. The Quebec in Canada almost seceded from the Canadian federalism but for the last minute rejection by the voters.
- 3. See Suniti Kumar Ghosh, *India's Nationality Problem and Ruling Classes,* Calcutta, 1996, p. 22.
- 4. *Ibid.,* pp. 16–17.
- 5. *Ibid.,* p. 17.
- 6. *Ibid.,* p. 23.
- 7. *Ibid.,* p. 17.
- 8. Quoted in *Ibid.,* p. 18.
- 9. *Ibid.,* pp. 14, 16.
- 10. *Ibid.,* pp. 13–14.
- 11. *Ibid.,* p. 14.
- 12. *The constitution of India,* Government of India, Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs, Official Language Section, New Delhi, 1991, p. 63;
- 13. Quoted in Suniti Kumar Ghosh, *op. cit.,* p. 23.
- 14. *The Hindustan Times,* New Delhi, 9th June, 1996, p. 5.
- 15. Quoted in Suniti Kumar Ghosh, *op. cit.,* p. 21.
- 16. Quoted in *Ibid.*
- 17. *Ibid.,* p. 20.
- 18. Quoted in *Ibid.*
- 19. Quoted in *Ibid.*
- 20. *Ibid.,* p. 15.