# **6 Contemporary politico- ideological efforts towards arresting the ethics deficit in governance and corruption**

The ethics deficit and corruption are dialectically interconnected. Hence it is argued that corruption is a contextual phenomenon, which means that contextual distortions due to the ethics deficit in governance provoke citizens to raise their voices. In laymen's perception, corruption is an abuse of public authority for personal gain that is largely attributed to the decline of ethics in public life. This is a commonly construed definition of corruption, which, despite being clearly spelt out, does not seem to be adequately equipped to conceptualize its complex character, given the fact that corruption is hydra- headed, and misuse of public office is only one of the forms in which it is articulated. Implicit here is the assumption that public and private interests are mutually exclusive and hence the pursuance of the latter in the name of the former will always be considered as deviant. This is well- captured by Joseph Nye, who defined corruption as 'behaviour which deviates from the formal duties of a public role because of private- regarding (personal, close family, private clique) pecuniary or state gains; or violates rules to justify certain types of private- regarding influence'.1 Unlike the conventional conceptualization of the phenomenon, Nye sought to view corruption as a deviant function directed towards fulfilling partisan goals by resorting to means which are justified since they are connected with the public domain. In such circumstances, public servants misuse the trust reposed on them rather willingly, simply to meet private ends. In her understanding of the concept, Shumer highlighted this aspect by stating that 'one dimension of . . . corruption is the privatization both of the average citizen and those in office. In the corrupt state', she argues further, 'men locate their values wholly within the private sphere and they use the public sphere to promote private interests'.2 So corruption is a socio- psychological idea, since it derives its sustenance from a specific psychological tilt towards corrupt practices, which a complementary social climate endorses.

 While seeking to locate the roots of the deviation by public servants, Shumer has drawn our attention to the wider social environment, in which deviant behaviour does not seem to be castigated as strongly as is expected. There is one related point here, which one comes across while reviewing the trajectory of corruption. Conceptually, corruption was associated in the past with the deterioration in the quality of government; gradually it became synonymous with bribery,

which means that monetary transactions were a key which was recognized by Hirschman when he mentioned that 'eventually the monetary meaning drove the nonmonetary one out almost completely'.3 One is now in a position to arrive at a definition which is reflective of the complexities of the concept both in its articulation and its substance. Corruption is a deviant exercise of power to protect private interests and in exchange for monetary benefits. This amounts to subversion of public interests by private interests, which always has wider ramifications in governance, especially when it is being manipulated to pursue partisan aims, disregarding completely the well- established rules and regulations governing public acts.

 Hence it has been argued that 'private interests and public interests are both perfectly fine, as long as they stay in their proper places; but once we have the contamination of the public by the private',4 it results in the derailment of public authority, which, if not contained immediately, will create conditions for corruption to strike at the roots of society. It is therefore important to remember that corruption hardly has a chance to flourish unless it has well- entrenched roots in the wider social milieu; once it is rooted, it creates a vicious circle, which is responsible for its survival and gradual strengthening. This is, however, not to argue that corruption is vicious everywhere; what is emphasized here is the point that, though corruption exists in all societies, 'it is also obviously more common in some societies than others and more common at some times in the evolution of a society than at other times'.5 So, corruption is transcendental, but its intensity varies from country to country and from one historical phase to another. This also confirms the critical importance of the social climate in restraining or encouraging deviant public personnel; if the social climate is slackening, it is more likely that forces supportive of corruption will naturally be nourished. There is, however, another part of the narrative, which is, manifested in attempts to combat corruption though powerful political mobilizations for transformation. As examples from India show, there have been several campaigns to weed out corruption from public life and establish the rule of law and the basic ethical code of conduct for those holding political authority.

 Corruption is driven by circumstances. According to the 1964 Santhanam Committee, corruption thrived in India, as shown in Chapter 5, because of the excessive discretionary powers that the public servants had enjoyed under the License–Quota–Permit Raj and also the absence of a permanent agency to discipline errant personnel by imposing punitive punishments. With the creation of the Central Vigilance Commission, the Committee felt that the incidence of corruption in public life was likely to be considerably reduced. It certainly had an impact, though not to the extent that was expected. Besides putting in place effective institutional mechanisms, the Committee also underlined the fact that the battle against corruption would succeed provided there existed a supportive social climate. This is most important for devising effective mechanisms for combating corruption.

 As shown in Chapter 5, the 1977 Shah Commission is illustrative of how government machinery was captured by the existing political leadership to fulfil an ideological mission, in opposition to those who apparently posed a threat to the democratically elected government. The Constitution of India became subservient to the Congress leadership, and deviant behaviour in public life was considered as inevitable in the light of the possible devastation in the country following the massive opposition mobilization against those in power. Conceptually, the 1975–7 Emergency is an era of political corruption in India in which public authorities were abused, beyond recognition, to accommodate the leadership- driven ideas of public well- being, which did not, however, go down well with stakeholders once implemented. The outcome was the mass campaign, led by the firebrand Gandhian leader Jayaprakash Narayan, which finally replaced the constitutional authoritarianism that the Congress supremo Indira Gandhi had imposed following the proclamation of an internal Emergency in India. By challenging the corrupt administration that thrived during the Emergency, the mass campaign also confirms the argument that, in a democratic polity, corruption cannot go unchecked because it creates its own enemy. The story has been repeated, it seems, in the era of economic liberalization in the wake of the outbreak of scams that seemingly have the public authority's support. Involvement of politicians was, on occasions, proved beyond doubt. Not only were they found to have abused authority, they were also reportedly bribed to extend favours to a select few at the cost of the government exchequer. Like the campaign that Jayaprakash Narayan had launched during the Emergency, Anna Hazare spearheaded a nonviolent movement at the behest of a political outfit, known as *India Against Corruption*, in 2011 to arrest the deterioration of governance. The campaign, however, fizzled out, as its primary goal of creating a national Ombudsman, *Lokpal* in Indian parlance, remained unrealized. Nonetheless, the Anna Hazare initiative reinforces the argument that political corruption, including the embezzlement of funds, can never go unchallenged in a democratic polity that is being constantly reinvented to take care of newer public demands.

 Corruption is universal, and so is the battle for its containment. This chapter therefore pursues the argument that corruption and the drive towards fighting corruption are dialectically interconnected. This is a two- dimensional claim: on the one hand, it is argued that corruption is inevitable, since human beings tend to be partisan unless there is societal pressure to be otherwise; on the other hand, elements of opposition exist which are triggered to take action for change in a conducive environment and under an able and effective leadership. As will be shown below, the campaigns that J P and Anna Hazare launched against the misuse of public authority for partisan gains are instances of powerful mass mobilizations against corruption and malpractices in governance. Along with their challenges against specific cases of abuse of authority, both J P and Anna Hazare felt that the creation of a favourable social climate was necessary to halt institutional decay, which further reinforces the idea that a meaningful containment of corruption is contingent on a social environment in which ethics- driven acts are always appreciated as an antidote to corruption and misgovernance.

# **Jayaprakash Narayan and his battle for corruption- free governance**<sup>6</sup>

As a Marxist, Jayaprakash Narayan (1902–79), popularly known as J P, engaged in sustained political activities to weed out corruption from public life. During the nationalist phase, he was also known as a crusader for justice for the downtrodden, a justice that was usually undermined because of the appropriation of the instruments of governance by vested interests. He was the conscience of the nationalist movement when it deviated from the well- established moral path and his Congress colleagues were reportedly appreciative of his role. Never having been a part of governance, J P always remained an outsider and yet played a very critical role when he was needed to lead movements against corrupt or deviant government. The opportunity came in 1974 when, as the Sarvadayo leader, J P gave a clarion call to fight the misrule and corruption that seemed to have crippled governance in Bihar. The movement was organized under the nonpolitical platform, Bihar Chhatra Sangarsh Samiti, which spearheaded the campaign under J P's leadership. What had begun in 1974 spread quickly beyond Bihar and, as shown in Chapter 5, led to the imposition of the internal Emergency in 1975.

 As argued above, J P's involvement in mobilization against misrule in 1975 was not an isolated case; in fact, one discerns a trend in his political life, illustrating that he was always vocal about the lack of ethics in governance, which was often reflected in the desire of the political leadership to deliberately bypass the basic code of conduct. His role in the campaign against the Emergency stood out. Given the fact that he was always associated with crusades for fair play and justice in governance, it will be enlightening to locate the campaign against the Emergency within his wider concerns for creating the social climate he considered critical for corruption- free governance. The aim here is to understand the overall theoretical predisposition that J P held, while conceptualizing his ideological priorities. In view of his sustained commitment to fight for just and fair governance, the battle in which he was involved during the Emergency was just a continuation of the desire that he had so sincerely nurtured since he had arrived on India's political scene. What J P thus provided was an ideological package which draws on the Marxist conceptualization of praxis, a creative combination of theory and practice in which neither is overshadowed by the other. The idea that runs through is also about a dialectical interconnection between what is known as derivative wisdom and practice. Drawn from what he learnt from his ideological convictions about the downtrodden, J P's model was also context driven, and is thus uniquely textured.

# **Plan for reconstruction of Indian polity**

J P's growing frustration with the Marxian praxis and the practical manifestation of its socio- economic and political order led him to evolve an alternative order suitable to the specific requirements of the country. The adoption of the

Constitution in post- independence times was taken positively by the majority of people, in the hope that it would result in the translating of the high aspirations of the national movement. However, people like J P soon got disillusioned with the workings of democratic polity in the country. Later, J P embarked on a tour of various European countries, ostensibly to get a feel for the structure and functioning of their governments. A basic flaw discovered by J P in the structure of most of the systems of government, including the one prevailing in India after the implementation of the Constitution of 1950, was the increasing concentration of power at the higher levels of government. This appeared quite distressing to J P as, being a true democrat, he wanted the power to be vested in the hands of the people and believed that only as much power as was unavoidable needed to be transferred to the higher levels of the authority structure. Thus, in order to give a concrete shape to his ideas on the comprehensive re- conceptualizing of the nature and structure of the Indian political system, he published the book *A Plea for the Reconstruction of Indian Polity* in 1959.

 In advancing his plea for the reconstruction of Indian polity J P appeared extremely influenced by the ideas of Sri Aurobindo, as he found that the 'extraordinary, intuitive sweep of his vision [that] has laid bare the true nature of the foundations of Indian polity.'7 Following Aurobindo's line of argument J P was convinced of the veracity of the ancient Indian political order, based on the centrality of the self- governing village communities. Indeed, J P's seemingly uncritical appreciation of the ancient Indian political order was so formidable that he argued that the conceptualization of the political system in the postindependent times in India was no less than 'a question of an ancient country finding its lost soul again.'8 Thus, J P's basic argument in calling for the reconstruction of the Indian polity was to reinvent and implant the village- based political order with the idea of decentralization underpinning the basic functional ethos and spirit of the system.

 Significantly, J P called for the replacement of the prevailing politicoeconomic order in India, based on the parliamentary system of democracy and centralized planning, with what is called the communitarian democracy and decentralized political economy.9 In fact, J P was a staunch critic of the parliamentary system of democracy, denouncing it from all quarters. But the most intolerable defect of such a system of democracy, to J P, was its inherent tendency towards centralism, which appears to be a contradiction in terms in itself. In other words, the notion of democracy could not be conceptualized in a way that leads to or supports any sort of centralism. As the parliamentary system of democracy invariably slips towards centralism, it could not have been the best of models of government for India.

 The notion of 'communitarian democracy', as advocated by J P, carries a distinct set of political processes that is squarely different from the ones characterizing the nature of political processes in a parliamentary democracy. For instance, the essence of parliamentary democracy lies in intense competition among the political parties to seek power and establish their majority in the political system. On the contrary, J P suggests that the essence of communitarian

democracy lies in cooperation and co- sharing, as such a system must afford due space for all the interests of the society to be articulated in the political decision making of the country in a harmonious manner. Naturally, in such a conceptualization of democracy, the emphasis of J P was on the moral and ethical moorings, in utter contrast to the material and power- centred nature of the parliamentary system. To J P, therefore, the fundamental task of communitarian democracy is the moral regeneration to be brought about by the example, service, sacrifice and love of scores of voluntary workers.10

 In concrete terms, the plea of J P to reconstruct the Indian polity was principally based on the framework of a decentralized, participatory and grassroots oriented political order, as reflected in practical shape by the idea of *Panchayati Raj* as existing in the country since the ancient times. This would be an essentially pyramidal model of democracy, with the widest possible diffusion of powers at the grassroot level, making it the real level of government that matters most to the people. Thus, J P's model gives a more decentralized base to the 'four- pillar model of government', as suggested by Ram Manohar Lohia. To put it differently, while Lohia suggested villages, district, state and centre as the levels of government, J P tried to broaden the base of the local level of government by including a middle level in between the village and district levels, so that the operational imperatives of local government could be strengthened. Thus, what J P suggested was five levels of decentralized polity, consisting of village, block, district, provincial and central levels.

 In J P's scheme of things, on reconstructing the Indian polity, an overwhelming emphasis was placed on reviving and reinvigorating the *Panchayati Raj* system or what he calls '*Swaraj* from below'.11 Under this framework, the basic and lowest unit of political organization would be the *Gram Sabha* (village assembly) consisting of all the adults of the village. Primarily being a deliberative body to ensure the participation of all the adult residents of the village in the governance of their affairs, the *Gram Sabha* would elect, ordinarily by consensus, five or more members among themselves to constitute its executive committee, the *Gram Panchayat*. Thus, through these '*Panchs*' (members of the village *Panchayat*) acting as the functionaries to take care of the day to day operation of the system, the *Gram Sabha* was supposed to act as the lynchpin of the grass root democracy conceptualized by J P.

 Establishing an organic link amongst the various units of the *Panchayati Raj*, J P suggested the creation of two more interlinked bodies within the system. The middle level of the *Panchayati Raj*, therefore, would be located at the block level and would be known as *Panchayat Samiti*. Consisting of the representatives of the constituent *Gram Sabhas*, the *Panchayat Samiti*'s operational area would be identical to the areas of its constituent *Gram Sabhas.* Functionally, the *Panchayat Samiti* would be entrusted with the responsibility of guiding and coordinating the activities of the *Gram Sabhas*, with particular focus on the formulation and execution of development projects. Finally, the apex of the *Panchayati Raj* was conceptualized as the District *Panchayat* or *Zila Parishad*, constituted by the members elected by the *Panchayat Samitis*. The functional domain of the *Zila*  *Parishad* would ordinarily remain focused on consolidating and fine- tuning the development projects initiated or approved by the *Panchayat Samitis* with a view to ensuring their technical and economic viability. The common feature underpinning all three levels of the *Panchayati Raj* would be their endeavour to provide the people with an opportunity to participate in the management of their own affairs and enjoy the spirit of true democracy.

 Though the bodies of *Panchayati Raj* constituted the core of the communitarian democracy advocated by J P, he did not remain oblivious to the imperatives of the provincial and central levels of government. What was unique in his conceptualizations of these levels of government was that he wanted them to remain confined, functionally, to their stipulated domains and devoid of any temptation to bulldoze over the lower levels of democratic institution. J P thus argued for a democratic and federal structure of polity in India, so that the true spirit of democratic governance might be infused through it and afforded to the masses. Moreover, for this, he wanted the political system to be free from a party politics based on numerous primitive and sectarian motivations to serve the selfish interests of the dominant unscrupulous elements in society.

 An important element of the plan of reconstruction of Indian polity, as suggested by J P, was the reconstruction of the economic system.12 Being dead against the exploitative and competitive economic system as prevailed in capitalist societies, he argued for the reconstruction of the Indian economic system on the doctrine of cooperation, coexistence and sharing. He decried the element of centralism in the Indian planning system and argued for the remodelling of the planning system by making it decentralized and non- political. On the pattern of the grassroots orientation in the political system of the country, J P advocated a village- orientation in the planning process of the country as well. He argued that the formulation of development plans should be initiated at the level of the village with progressive integration and consolidation at the block and district levels. The planning processes at the state and national levels should confine themselves to only providing technical and logistical support for the formulation and execution of the plans at the local levels. J P also called for sectoral balance and harmony in bringing about the rapid economic development of the country. Thus, the restructured political economy of the country, in J P's view, would result in the realization of true *swaraj* for the common people of the country.

 Despite the seemingly sensible and logical consistency in the plea of J P for the reconstruction of Indian polity, his scheme has been criticized by scholars as being utopian and suitable only for the wonderland of J P's imagination.13 A common critique of J P's scheme has been its obvious focus on reviving and implanting an ancient Indian construct which might have outlived its utility in contemporary times. Moreover, the disproportionate focus on the *Panchayati Raj* as the nucleus of the post- independent Indian polity appears absurdly abstract, among other things. Thus, over the years, J P himself became quite weary of the practical utility of his plea for the reconstruction of Indian polity and shifted his focus of attention to what is known as *Sarvodaya*.

# **Sarvodaya**

*Sarvodaya* was a conceptual construct J P borrowed from Gandhi to articulate his vision of a decentralized, participatory and egalitarian socio- economic and political order for the country. Delineating the core concerns of the idea of *Sarvodaya*, Vinoba Bhave wrote, 'Sarvodaya does not mean good government or majority rule, it means freedom from government, it means decentralization of power.'14 Conceptualized so, *sarvodaya*, thus, becomes synonymous with a state of order where the bonds of being governed by a seemingly alien or outside ruler are totally absent and the people are able to enjoy their lives without any extraneous considerations. Hence, the full realization of the ideal of *sarvodaya* would necessitate the absence of government itself, yet, even if the government remains in existence, the power relations ought to be so decentralized that nobody finds themselves in any sort of subjugation to another. It is within this theoretical framework that J P outlined his vision of a *sarvodaya* social order.

 In visualizing his *sarvodaya* social order, J P begins with an exploration of the innate characteristics of human nature. Though acknowledging that evil spirits and motivations exist in individuals and society, he argued that they could be overcome by the virtues of compassion and non- violence. Moreover, by inculcating the positive values of life such as cooperation, generosity, creativity and eternal joy, the good spirits and motivations of the people might be brought to the fore to make them realize the significance of such traits in securing a happy and peaceful life for themselves. Above all, if the examples of such a perspective on life become prominent and people were properly educated in this regard, they would definitely pursue noble causes and follow good men.15 Thus, at the root of the proposed *sarvodaya* order of J P, lay his indomitable belief in the inherently noble and positive nature of the common people, which may be harnessed to secure a just, egalitarian and democratically decentralized order in India.

 The social component of the *sarvodaya* order rests on an all- inclusive egalitarian social structure.16 Social relations would be based on the principles of equality, justice and inclusion. As the society would seek the welfare of each and every individual, there would not be any place for socially degrading and discriminatory practices, rooted in the primitive and sectarian motivations of any individual. J P was quite specific about the role of various sections in society and argued for a visionary mindset and missionary zeal among the youth whose selfless and untiring efforts would be the main vehicle through which the reconstruction of society would materialize. A democratic ethos and spirit would infuse social interactions and nobody would be persuaded to do anything against their will no matter the acceptability of the task at hand. Volunteerism would be a major plank to get people to do their bit for the welfare of society.

 The political dimension of *sarvodaya*, as explained earlier, would rest on the widest and most effective system of decentralized and participatory democracy, made concrete in the form of *Panchayati Raj*. What, however, was refreshing in the *sarvodaya* political order was J P's insistence on revolving his scheme of things around what is known as *lokniti* (politics of people) and *lokshakti* (power of people) in place of the existing dependence on *rajniti* (politics of power) and *rajshakti* (power of state). Despite appearing unconventional, such notions of a people- centric and society- centric perspective on Indian politics would have seemed quite natural, given J P's constant pushing for the decentralized and participatory nature of the *sarvodaya* political order. In fact, in the later years when governments in India were charged with numerous cases of corruption and highhandedness in dealing with political opponents, J P relied exclusively on powers having their roots in social and other non- governmental formations. Thus, J P conceptualized the *sarvodaya* social order as consisting of morally upright individuals having the courage to stand up for ideals such as 'self- government, self management, mutual cooperation and sharing, equality, freedom and brotherhood'.17

 Economically, the framework of the *sarvodaya* order would seek to establish a balanced and equitable economic set- up in the country. India being a predominantly agricultural country, J P was sure to afford the first place to agricultural activities in the economic life of the people. Hence, he argued for organizing numerous collectivist farms under the collective ownership and management of the whole village. Further, J P's deep faith in the Gandhian economic perspective apparently influenced him to advocate a prime place for village and cottage industries, organized at local and regional level. However, the wave of heavy industrialization in various parts of world made him also offer a place to heavy and large- scale industries in the industrial part of the economy. Thus, in a *sarvodaya* economy, a balanced approach, according due weight to various sectors of the economy, would be followed. The net gains from the economic activities of society would be so equitably distributed that it would result in a decentralized, prosperous, distributive and participatory economic order.

# **Methods of realizing the** *sarvodaya* **order**

Having conceptualized the *sarvodaya* social order in very insightful and precise terms, J P also appeared quite categorical in suggesting the appropriate methods of implementing the plan for creating such a social order in India. Quite evidently, J P's deep erudition and lived experiences of various methods and institutional arrangements to bring about drastic transformations in society made him a rebel vis- à-vis the numerous conventional methods of effecting desirable social change. For instance, he no longer favoured his old fancies about the classical Marxian prescription of changing society through revolutionary violence. Castigating the violent methods of social change, he held that such methods did not take care of the veracity of the objective in view and 'ensure the victory of the party that is more skilled in their use.' The victory ensured by such methods would invariably, as shown primarily by the Russian experiences, be authoritarian and undermine 'all attempts at democracy and the attainment of social justice or equality'.18

 Significantly, J P was equally disillusioned with the liberal methods of social change, which sought to achieve it by legal provisions and the institutional

arrangement to implement them. J P's basic critique of the parliamentary route of effecting social change was that it would not yield the desired result without mentally preparing people to accept and adapt such changes in their life styles. As he wrote eloquently,

It is not institutions, not laws, not political systems, not constitutions that create good people. For that you require a widespread process of education understood in the widest sense of the word. Education does not mean academic education; but the improving of human beings through service, love, examples, preaching, reasoning and argument.19

J P also argued for the setting of concrete examples by the leaders and awakened citizens of the country, so that the masses could emulate such examples and, equipped with proper education, would be able to become the harbingers of a new *sarvodaya* social order in the country.

 The cumulative impact of the twin virtues of education and concrete examples, in J P's view, would be to indelibly ingrain awareness in a person's mental and moral values, infusing him with some sort of voluntary perspective towards the prevailing problems of society and their plausible solutions. The concrete exemplification of such a moral and theoretical construct was experienced in the *Bhoodan* and *Gramdaan* movements launched by Vinoba Bhave. J P was very impressed with the idea and practice of such voluntary sharing on the part of the people and argued for the extension and strengthening of such movements by way of *sampattidaan* (sharing together of property) and the ultimate *jeevandaan* (sharing one's whole life and dedicating it to the cause of the welfare of others). J P anticipated that such voluntary sharing of the various prized possessions of life would ensure a non- violent, voluntary and democratic transformation of Indian society on the lines of the *sarvodaya* order.

# **Total revolution**

Total revolution (*Sampurna Kranti*) was the last intellectual intervention of J P in his unending quest to seek and establish a socio- economic and political order in the country that would turn India into a democratic, federal, participatory, equitable and prosperous nation in the world. The concept of total revolution was developed for the first time by Vinoba Bhave during the 1960s to articulate his desire for a comprehensive movement in the country which would transform all aspects of life in order to 'mould a new man . . . to change human life and create a new world.'20 The idea was picked up by J P, who called upon the people in 1975 to work for total revolution in order to stem the rot creeping into all aspects of public life and create a whole new world, encompassing the basic elements of socio- economic and political order that he had been advocating in the name of *sarvodaya*.

 The context of J P calling for total revolution21 was provided by the growing authoritarianism in the functioning of the government machinery headed by Mrs Indira Gandhi. One of the nefarious repercussions of such governance was the spreading of corruption in all aspects of political life in India. Hence, on the declaration of Emergency in June 1975, J P found it compelling to call for total revolution in the country, aimed at transforming the whole gamut of the social, economic, political, spiritual, educational and cultural life of the people. J P was convinced that piece- meal engineering would not suffice to bring about the desirable level and pace of holistic transformation in India, thereby necessitating the call for total revolution. Through his call for total revolution, J P, therefore, was not satisfied with having cosmetic changes in the outer set- up of the socioeconomic and political structures of power but also called for effecting and deepening an informed consciousness in the masses to ensure the holistic transformation of the entire system. The essence of all such transformations would lie in restoring the basic spiritual foundations of all aspects of human life in the country.

 J P's concept of total revolution aimed at reversing the rot taking place in the political and economic system of the country, ostensibly due to the concentration of political and economic power in few hands, and restoring the sanctity of institutions and procedures in those spheres of life by decentralizing power into the hands of the masses. In the sphere of politics, J P noted the inherent fallacies of the prevailing parliamentary system of government, as its basic characteristics such as the electoral system, party- based political processes and increasing concentration of power in the hands of one person i.e., the Prime Minister were bound to convert the system into a corrupt, tyrannical, farcical one. Hence, in his conceptualization of total revolution, J P was firm on reforming the electoral system in such a way that the people could vote in an incorruptible manner and in accordance with their free conscience. Moreover, in such a system, there would be no place for political parties and the potential concentration of power in a few hands would be effectively curbed by having the greatest possible diffusion of political power to the various levels of government.

 As with political power, J P was also convinced of the perverse effects of the concentration of economic power in the hands of a few in society. He therefore also called for the total recasting of the economic system of the country. Arguing for a mixed economy framework for India, J P aspired for the economic system of the country to be able to provide for the basic necessities of the people, such as food, clothes and shelter. His idea of *sampattidaan* was nothing but a call for the sharing together of wealth and economic resources in such a way that their utilization benefitted larger sections of people rather than ensuring affluence for a few. J P visualized an economic order for the country in which there would be progressive socialization of the means of production by way of establishing cooperative societies and voluntary associations to manage the resources with a view to ensuring prosperity for all. Thus, even in the sphere of economic activities, J P's diagnosis of and cure for the ills appeared rooted in the concentration and decentralization of power respectively. He therefore suggested that the first and foremost task of the *sarvodaya* worker would be to 'diffuse political and economic power and decentralize the politico- economic structure'.22 Indeed,

decentralization, along with the people's participation, was argued by J P as the panacea for all the evils which had become deep rooted in the politico- economic system of the country.

 J P's call to execute the idea of total revolution in 1975 was accompanied by some sort of blueprint for the volunteers to carry out the implementation of the scheme of holistic transformations of Indian society. He exhorted the people to rise against the authoritarian and inimical policies and programmes of the government of the day and persevere to push it back to its legitimate domain. He also called for the dissolution of the legislative bodies in the country, as they had ceased to reflect the opinion of the people by going neck deep into all sorts of political and economic corruptions. J P also pointed out the problem of price rises as a target of total revolution, since it had the potential to turn the life of the people into virtual poverty and starvation, bearing in mind their inability to pay the exorbitantly high prices of essential commodities. At the same time, he was also forthright about eradicating the existing social inequality in the country by putting a full stop to discrimination among the people on the basis of religion and caste. In a nutshell, the operationalization of the idea of total revolution in 1975 encompassed within its folds almost all the major problems facing the people before they embarked on the path of long- term revolutionary transformation, aimed at establishing the *sarvodaya* social order in the country.

 In its operationalization, however, the idea of total revolution, as advocated by J P, occasionally evoked misplaced perceptions in the minds of its practitioners. For instance, it undoubtedly proved electrifying for the people and gave birth to a mammoth students' movement in many parts of the country, which was particularly formidable in Bihar in 1974. But the public perception of total revolution appeared ambivalent, as many construed it to be the total subduing of *rajya shakti* or state power at the hands of the people. However, J P was quite categorical that he did not advocate the disappearance of all political power but, rather, the placement of it where it belonged, in the hands of the people.23 Similarly, a few people tried to have recourse to violent methods in carrying out the movement for total revolution. But J P was firm in his conviction that total revolution could be brought about only through peaceful and non- violent voluntary actions on the part of the people.

 As is evident, J P had launched a successful crusade against the internal Emergency, which resulted in its revocation in 1977. The campaign was fair because it was against the efforts of a select political leadership to debase governance for its own cause. In other words, by challenging the authority that had taken away constitutionally guaranteed democratic rights, J P had articulated a voice for re- establishing the republican spirit of the Constitution. It would not be an exaggeration to suggest that the Emergency was a paradox of history since it was 'as much a constitutional response by Indira Gandhi to the constitutional means that the opposition parties had adopted to unseat her'.24 The Emergency thus provided us with an experience that brought out very clearly that 'the Constitution contained provisions in it that could both enhance the democratic rights of the people and be used to deny [them] even the [constitutionally endorsed] fundamental rights'.25 Nonetheless, the proclamation of the Emergency had created a context in which the issue of ethics in governance was not only raised, but was also sought to be conclusively addressed. J P can thus be said to have set in motion processes whereby the importance of a moral code of conduct for public personnel was forcefully reiterated.

 The paradoxical nature of the Emergency and J P's successful mobilization against the excesses raise an open- ended question, if one seeks to comprehend those two tumultuous years in independent India's recent political history. The Emergency was a constitutional act, and so was the challenge that the opposition parties had mounted against the prevalent political authority. If the Emergency was a constitution- endorsed design of authoritarianism, it was not a deviation from the rule of law; and hence those who proclaimed it escaped condemnation. Similarly, the opposition parties were within the constitutional bounds when they protested by undertaking what the ruling authority had dubbed as unconstitutional means. A very piquant situation had emerged. Whether the governing elites indulged in unethical practices by declaring an Emergency according to the constitutional provisions is definitely a question that cannot be answered conclusively. Likewise, the fact that the mass endeavour to unseat the Congress party was based on fulfilling constitutional rights further complicates the issue. In either case, the rule of law was not grossly violated, although its application, in seeking to realize the whimsical personal preferences of the leadership, was certainly contrary to the fundamental ethical values from which the Constitution of India derives its sustenance. As shown in Chapter 5, the 1977 Shah Commission illustrates how the majority of public officials did not care about basic ethical values while executing instructions from above; not only did they personalize authority, they also indulged in activities which were contrary to their constitutional obligations. The Commission had expressed alarm at the number of instances of deliberate distortion of rules and regulations to supporting their 'misdeeds'. The government became a captive of elite interests, ignoring public outcry against the deviant public officials. J P gave powerful voice to those who, regardless of consequence, agreed to fight for the restoration of constitutional governance, which had been legitimately sacrificed, as the perpetrators of the Emergency justified it, to save the country from being devastated as a result of the organized protest by the opposition parties that had begun in Bihar in 1974. The support that J P was able to generate for his anti- corruption campaign had 'more to do with the political and economic context than Narayan's demagoguery'.26 Plagued by social and economic underdevelopment, population pressures and underemployment in the state, the ordinary Indians seemed to have been completely disillusioned with the existing state, which led to growing hostility towards those in charge of political authority and 'their self- serving mismanagement'.27 The movement took root in a propitious milieu and it was therefore easier for J P to mobilize the masses with a purpose. His leadership was undoubtedly a rallying point in bringing together people with contrasting ideological inclinations when he exhorted them to join him in his opposition to the Emergency.

 The anti- Emergency campaign was thus as much an ideological protest against a debasing government as it was an endeavour to establish a code of ethics for those holding public authority. A fight to restore constitutional democracy, J P's crusade was, in other words, an effort towards creating and consolidating a social climate in which concerns about ethics could strike a chord against the 'arbitrariness and reckless disregard of the rights of others and the consequent misery [which] . . . terrorized citizens resulting in a complete loss of faith of the people in the fairness and objectivity of the Administration generally'.28 By contributing to the rise of a context in which government machinery was utilized to the detriment of their public aim, the two- year Emergency was also an eye- opener in the sense that it had shown, rather virulently, how an ethically derailed public authority deviated from the basic code of conduct while discharging its role. Governance became highly personalized from top to bottom, and authority was exercised in a tyrannical fashion, violating, without qualms, the fundamental constitutional ethos supportive of democracy and individual rights.

# **The context of the 2011 Anna Hazare movement**

Similar to the J P movement that had its roots in the flagrant abuse of public authority, the 2011 Anna Hazare campaign was a response to declining governance in the light of the series of scams in which public officials, including ministers, were reportedly involved. At the behest of a non- political outfit, known as *India Against Corruption*, the 2011 anti- corruption campaign had built a mass base, rather spontaneously, not only in Delhi but also elsewhere in the country. The pace at which the campaign acquired a national character caught everybody by surprise, which perhaps confirms the mass resentment against those holding responsible positions of authority in the public domain. Outraged by the inept government, which was charged with being complicit with corrupt forces, citizens joined the campaigners in large numbers with the hope that it would not only expose the deviants, but also lay the foundation for an ethically sound political system. The fact that a large number of people, mostly the urban middle class, which had otherwise been indifferent to agitations 'landed up to protest and took the initiative through Facebook and Twitter [appears to be] a reaction to the arrogance that the leaders of the political parties displayed when Anna Hazare launched his fast unto death'.29 Although the movement remained primarily a middle class assault on tainted governance, it had created conditions for change by releasing mass energies for a cause. The Anna Hazare initiative was also testimony to the fact that public outcry, despite giving an immediate jolt to the system, may not always be a source for meaningful transformation, because of its transitional character; spontaneous outbursts of public outrage do not get translated into sustained movements unless they are organizationally backed.

 The Anna Hazare campaign was the culmination of mass disillusionment with the existing government, led by the United Progressive Alliance, which had begun its second term in 2009. As argued in Chapter 1, in the wake of

globalization, civil society has become an integral component of governance, ascertaining conceptually the critical importance of external accountability as opposed to internal accountability, which is so commonly conceived as part of the Weberian understanding of public authority. By recognizing that 'the civil society engagements are groundbreaking initiatives that have emerged out of an urge to serve the needs of the common man',30 the 2005 Second Administrative Reforms Commission thus underlines that

civil society groups have put pressure on erring governments to reform corrupt practices. They have also provided monitoring mechanisms to track corruption by educating members of the public and associating them in anticorruption efforts. They have helped generate demand for reducing corruption and introducing systemic reforms. . . . The successful initiatives of civil society groups [thus] underscore the criticality of educating people and raising their awareness of fighting corruption.31

In the context of the Anna Hazare movement, the role of civil society remained critical; not only did the civil society activists help mobilize support, they also played their part in educating the people by charting how government machinery became a captive of the corrupt and ethically derailed individuals involved in governance. It has been historically shown that 'a strong and vigilant civil society can be a check on corruption',32 and the 2011 Anna Hazare- led mobilization proved that once again.

 What was the immediate context that provoked mass outrage? A series of scams broke out during the second term of the Congress- led coalition government, which was thus labelled by the contemporary media as perhaps the most tainted government in independent India. Instead of providing an analytical account of each and every scam that has rocked India in the present century, this section focuses on two major scams – the 2010 2G Scam and the Commonwealth Games Scam – that appeared to have created massive distrust in the then government. Dubbed as number two by the *Times* magazine in its list of top ten abuses of power, the 2G Spectrum scam, in which mobile phone licenses were sold for a fraction of their value, resulted in the loss of a staggering \$39 billion to the national exchequer. Not only was the loss astronomically high, the 2G scam hogged the limelight because of the involvement of key cabinet ministers, top bureaucrats and also major private players. In its audit report, the Comptroller and Auditor General of India showed how the government failure to contain corrupt ministers led to a scam of such devastating proportions. Some of those who allowed this to happen were put behind bars; some of them were given lesser punishments. By exposing the scam, the report and an alert media helped prepare the ground for the movement that was to begin in 2011.

 The Comptroller and Auditor General also indicted those in charge of holding the 2010 Commonwealth Games in Delhi. The 744 page report reveals how collusion between politicians, bureaucrats and corporations resulted in a loss of almost \$6 billion because of (a) the high price tag for the services and (b) the

distribution of almost \$2 billion which was never accounted for. The report of the V K Shunglu Committee, which was appointed to look into the excesses committed by the organizers of the Games, was most revealing. Norms for financial transactions were violated and no code of ethics was followed. 'Accountability, internal and external, was not the norm', argues the Committee.33 Things moved in accordance with the whims of one individual, the chief of the Commonwealth Games organizing committee Suresh Kalmadi. The Shunglu Committee noted that 'all key decisions were taken by a handful of powerful loyalists to the Chairman of the Organizing Committee [disregarding completely] the presence of the Executive Board [which was] constituted for this purpose'.34 Not only did the organizing committee operate in 'a coterie style', it included . . . many senior persons with questionable integrity and past records of watchdog cases. Besides cases of the blatant violation of government rules and regulations in regard to the posting and transfer of public personnel, 'there was no effective vigilance and internal audit', laments the Committee, 'to provide watchdog functions and promote compliance with propriety and ethical norms or efficiency'.35 The wasteful expenditure could have been easily avoided had those involved in the preparation for the Games remained committed to the code of conduct for public services. The result was disastrous because, as the Shunglu Committee felt, 'the acts of commission and omission [on the part of the organizers] not only facilitated undue gains to contractors but also led to wasteful expenditure and contributed to the overall loss to the Government'.36 Besides assigning responsibility for irregularities, which 'range from administrative misdemeanours to criminal misconduct', the Committee reveals in its report that 'the malaise runs deep and cannot be dismissed as one- off aberrations, for which relatively junior functionaries alone can be held responsible'.37 This observation is most instructive to make the argument that corruption in governance in India is very well entrenched and cannot be removed so easily. As shown in Chapter 5, corruption was attributed to the uncontrolled discretionary power of civil servants in the License- Quota-Permit Raj, while it remained a constant source of irritation in governance in the changed environment in which the public officials' discretionary power had considerably shrunk.

 So, the Anna Hazare movement unfolded in a context in which several scams had already rocked India. It was easier for the organizers to mobilize in the light of popular demand for an end to corruption. There was a common feeling that, since the government had connived with vested interests, it had simply become too inept to effectively combat corruption in governance. Added to this feeling was 'the discovery of the loot in the upper echelons of governance, by top politicians, senior bureaucrats and even the judges in the higher courts'.38 Hazare's solution was to create a strong ombudsman, Lokpal in Indian parlance, to contain corruption, which was all that was needed 'to unleash the full benefits of liberalization in India'.39 The institution of Lokpal was first suggested by the first Administrative Reforms Commission in 1968 and the first Lokpal bill was immediately introduced in that year. Since then, it has been introduced nine times, but never passed. Essentially a technocratic solution, the Lokpal was thus assumed to be adequately equipped to completely root out corruption. Insisting on legislation for a strong Lokpal, Anna Hazare and his colleagues appeared to have expressed complete faith in a panoptical institution, capable of fulfilling their ideological mission.

 Hazare began his campaign for a strong Lokpal in April 2011, later continued by the beginning of his 'fast unto death' in August 2011. Instead of describing the movement in detail, the purpose here is to capture its nature by reference to the features that appear to be critical in comprehending its character. Hazare's movement was invariably a middle- class movement because in him the Indian middle class had found a saviour and a saint to support. By resorting to a typical Gandhian technique – fast unto death – Hazare seemed to have created an image of being Gandhian to his followers. What is striking to note is that, although he might have appropriated a Gandhian method for political mobilization, he was hardly Gandhian as his socio- political activities in Ralegaon Siddhi had shown: his support for corporal punishment for the wrong- doers was just one example to argue that his claim of being a Gandhian seems to be overstretched.

 It is true that Anna Hazare's contribution to Ralegaon Siddhi's socioeconomic development is phenomenal; despite being criticized for his visible patriarchal prejudices, his role in transforming the village is indisputable. In the process, he allowed a personality cult to grow around him. While he played a critical role in development, he also created a discursive reality in which the basic democratic values of live and let live were sacrificed. The idea was to create a homogeneous society, being reinforced by 'a top- down decision- making process [drawing on] . . . the expectations of uncritical obedience to a supreme leader . . . to whom unquestioning obedience has to be rendered'.40 Within such conceptual parameters, Hazare created his model village, which endorsed

physical coercion garbed as parental concerns, threats of corporal and symbolic force to reinforce authority, flogging of offenders with an army belt to make them mend their ways, and the excessive use of religious symbols to drive home lessons in a morality steeped in orthodox Hinduism.41

As is evident, Ralegaon Siddhi epitomized an ideal village in which deviant behaviour was not to be tolerated under any circumstances. Hazare did not find his methods wrong since they yielded results, and India, he strongly felt, needed shock therapy to create an environment in which individuals were too scared to indulge in corruption because of the adverse consequences. With the institutionalization of a system opposed to corrupt practices, it would be easier for a mindset that is appreciative of a code of ethics to strike roots. So, Anna Hazare's method is both socially endorsed and ideologically executed in circumstances in which democratic decision- making processes did not seem to have been encouraged.

 A brief discussion of how Anna Hazare became a symbol of the crusade against the abuse of government authority and corruption in Ralegaon Siddhi is perfectly in order here. Steeped in poverty, unemployment, malnutrition,

migration, recurring drought and environmental degradation, Ralegaon Siddhi in 1975 was just a typical village in Maharashtra. In a period of ten years, the village acquired the tag of a model village, the transformation of which was attributed to Hazare's sustained endeavour. There were *two* major steps that he undertook to create an environment in which the villagers became partners in the social cleansing that Hazare had so assiduously pursued. It was possible for the participants to get involved in social work only if they were, as Hazare insisted, rule- bound and norms- conscious. It was obvious that Hazare would remain obedient to rules and norms, because of his training as a former soldier of the Indian army. As was explained in his statement,

the daily routine enforced in the army . . . led to the development of a disciplined life, benefits of which I am availing myself of today. The habit of giving due respect and regard to the seniors by age, post or competence was inculcated in us. . . . This has helped me in conducting the village development work at Ralegaon Siddhi according to the rules and regulations decided by us by common consent.42

How to inculcate discipline if it received no takers? Hence the first solution that Hazare provided was a mixture of persuasion and physical coercion. In the process of social transformation, he believed, 'advice, persuasion or counselling do not always work and occasionally force has to be applied [because] the fear of physical force works'.43 The application of punitive punishment was most effective when Hazare undertook a campaign against alcoholism. The decision to close down the breweries in the village was taken democratically, with the villagers consent. Once that was decided, Hazare did not hesitate to apply corporal punishment to those who violated the village diktat. It was therefore decided that anybody consuming alcohol was to be punished in public: the person caught while drinking was to be tied to a pole near the village temple and flogged to generate fear and thus restraint. This worked miracles in a very short period of time and alcoholism ceased to be a social menace in Ralegaon Siddhi.44 What explains the popularity of such a measure was perhaps (a) Hazare's exemplary, bordering on hegemonic, control over the villagers; and (b) their appreciation of the positive social effects on family life for those who suffered terribly as a result of unrestricted alcoholism. As a result, 'flogging has become a part of everyday life and belief [and] not only has the authority employing it the sanction to use it, others legitimize its use as well'.45 It was therefore an environment, sustained by persuasion and also coercion, if necessary, in which a new moral economy had emerged where popular consent was perhaps solicited differently. Clearly an individual- centric authority, Anna Hazare thus epitomized a wave of thinking bordering on the Gandhian emphasis on moral values by reiterating their critical salience in building a robust culture of integrity in public life.

 Hazare devised his second step by charting out five universal rules which are (a) *Nasbandi* (restriction of family size), (b) *nashabandi* (ban on alcohol), (c) *charabandi* (ban on free grazing), (d) *khuraabandi* (ban on tree feeling) and

(e) *shramdan* (voluntary labour for the community).46 This is primarily a checklist of dos and don'ts, and since the villagers accepted them as a vow, these rules were more or less carried forward. Even if there was opposition, their voices always remained subdued, since the majority of the villagers acquiesced in what was proclaimed as the village charter. Besides these five principles, Ralegaon Siddhi also follows well- defined codes of conduct to maintain the so- called purity of culture; hence not only are shops forbidden to sell *bidis* and cigarettes, film songs and movies are also prohibited. Apart from an embargo on culturally polluting influences, Hazare's diktat also forced the villagers to change their culinary preferences. Since vegetarianism creates peacefulness and does not contribute to violence, Hazare and his youth brigade in Ralegaon Siddhi engage in a relentless campaign to popularize the vegetarian diet. The campaign was effective among the *Dalits* as well, out of a symbiotic relationship that Anna Hazare had created by developing what he called, 'a faith relationship' with them. Based on this relationship, Hazare claims, there had emerged an inclination among the *Dalits* in favour of vegetarian meals.47

 How does Hazare sustain his authority in Ralegaon Siddhi? Undoubtedly his role in addressing what ailed the village was a critical factor; he became a saviour to the villagers who were socially peripheral, economically exploited and ideologically marginalized. By dint of his sustained developmental work, especially through effective watershed management, he created good will among the villagers, which yielded positive results. It was not merely his personal popularity that endeared him to the masses, but also his acute strategic sense explains his massive popularity in Ralegaon Siddhi. Hence it was not unusual for him to resort to religious symbols and imagery to gain and consolidate a support base. The fact that most of his decisions were taken in the temple courtyard is governed by the idea that, once a commitment is given before God, it must be respected to avoid heavenly retribution. It was also felt that the 'temple has an atmosphere of purity and sanctity [and] decisions taken in a temple are believed to have the sanction of god and people are more likely to follow them'.48 The idea was not novel, but was strategically applied to pursue an ideological goal involving the masses regardless of social, economic and political divides. As shown above, Hazare had a clear vision of what was to be done in Ralegaon Siddhi to realize its socio- economic potential in what was a completely hopeless situation. In seeking to fulfil his mission, he may have decried the democratic means which he felt were futile; nonetheless, by articulating an alternative, perhaps a powerful alternative, on the basis of his own analysis of the Indian reality, Hazare has also shown the importance of morality, ethics and integrity in shaping public life. These are values that can be inculcated in a way in which deviant behaviours are not only despised but also have no easy acceptance. Hazare's main purpose was to create 'a moral regime, not only to get rid of liquor, smoking or non- vegetarianism, but also to exercise control over the private and the public, the personal and the political'.49 His idea of morality is thus reflective of what he believed in personal life. Critical of western influences for their pernicious impact on Indian culture, Hazare was also vehemently opposed to

indecent cinemas and television shows, which were impediments to the growth of a healthy moral culture. Hence, in Ralegaon Siddhi, film songs and movies (except specific religious films) were strictly forbidden. Along with maintaining the high moral standards of the villagers, these restrictions, if applied at the national level, would surely arrest 'the falling moral standards of the nation'.50 As is evident, Anna Hazare is also a moral crusader who sought to govern Ralegaon Siddhi in accordance with well- defined codes of moral conduct which needed to be imposed to avoid India's degeneration. That he managed to create a solid moral order in the village confirms how important a leader could be in fulfilling specific tasks. The fact that the radical transformation of Ralegaon Siddhi was absolutely individual driven may have given Hazare tremendous confidence in the ability of a morally upright and impeccably honest individual to do miracles. This is perhaps the reason why he favoured the creation of an absolutely powerful Lokpal who, if endowed with the quality that he insists, could be an effective instrument not only for combating corruption but also for building a society appreciative of the values of integrity and ethics in governance.

# **Support base of the Hazare campaign for Lokpal**

A scan of the social background of the supporters that thronged to back up the campaign for a strong Lokpal reveals that it was a middle class- dominated affair. An aspiring middle class, comprising almost one- third of India's total demography, which came into being in the wake of economic liberalization found in the Hazare- sponsored Jan Lokpal bill an effective device to take care of bureaucratic red tapism, to mete- out maximum punishment for the corrupt politicians and officials and to weed out roots of corruption to a significant extent. Those supporting the India Against Corruption campaign were persuaded to believe that a parliamentary law had the capacity to effectively mitigate corruption in public life. The creation of an effective Lokpal, it was believed, was an antidote to corruption. His followers were led to believe, a commentator thus argues, that 'a powerful individual with a reputation for honesty [with substantial power] would eradicate corruption, without the need for changing the prevailing system'.51 The idea seemed to have created a hope which was reflected in the swelling of mass support that was witnessed during the fast that Hazare had undertaken to force the government to initiate steps for effective legislation.

 It was the campaign of a well- off Indian middle class. *The Economic Times* thus argues that

if you needed evidence that the Anna Hazare movement had a large element of middle- class support, you need to look no further than the parking lot at the India Gate, New Delhi; it was full of [luxury cars] . . . which Anna Hazare's supporters had driven in from far flung areas to express their support.52

Although the middle class had constituted the core of his support base, the movement also inspired people from different walks of life, as was evident when

Mumbai's *Dabbawallas*, (a unique service industry for delivering boxed- lunches to the office- goers in the city), for example, went on strike for the first time in 120 years to protest about Hazare's arrest. Besides the *Dabbawallas*, student groups, farmer groups, senior citizen societies, the sex workers' union, the taxi drivers' union and the small vendors' association supported the campaign as it picked up following the arrest of Hazare on 16 August 2011. The arrest can thus be said to have set off a groundswell of protest across the country. Mainly a middle- class outcry, the Hazare campaign gradually gained momentum, because it articulated the mass resentment with those usurping public authority for partisan gains. The campaign created an optimism in a context in which the existing Congress- led coalition government had lost its credibility, given the involvement of its members in various scams. It has thus been argued that Anna Hazare is significant because

his fast unto death catalyzed the exasperation and the anger of Indian citizens. The sight of hundreds of people holding candles in their hands [to show solidarity with Hazare] transmitted a simple but powerful message: citizens have a right to demand that the taxes that are extracted from them are spent for the public good and not private gains.53

Hazare's public image as being honest also helped the campaign to instantaneously create a support base among the youth who, like Hazare, felt that the immediate need was for a legally backed strong institution. So, opinion seems to have converged on the formation of a Leviathan- type *Lokpal* to meaningfully counter corruption and to establish a robust culture of integrity in governance. Hazare also defended the stance by saying that 'a strong *Lokpal* is needed and the corrupt should be put to jail or better still, hanged to the death'.54 How did a Gandhian justify being in favour of capital punishment? He himself explained by stating that 'the need is not of Mahatma Gandhi but of Chhatrapati Shivaji' (who resorted to violent means to combat the ruthless Mughal emperor in Maharashtra).55

 What is noteworthy is the fact that the initial low key mobilization led to a massive movement, following Hazare's fast- unto-death pledge, that 'had sprouted in urban centres across the country [and] nowhere did anyone plan the protest, [people] gathered around spaces connected with Gandhi'.56 It became an all- India movement which had no parallel because, for the first time, the use of social media was widespread. Twitter, Facebook and You Tube became important tools of mobilization and activism along with candle light vigils, which also cemented a bond among the participants. It was as if an Arab Spring was being enacted on Indian soil, especially in the light of the techniques of mobilization, which were novel. Anna Hazare gave a powerful voice to the disgruntled middle class while the 2010–12 Arab Spring translated the participants' revolutionary fervour into movements against authoritarian regimes. Hence it has been argued that

the modus operandi and the engine behind the revolutionary uprisings [in the Arab world] is a mode of delayed defiance that results in the gradual

appearance of a new imaginative geography of liberation in which ideas of freedom, social justice and human dignity are brought forth to the collective imagination.57

The comparison of the Arab Spring with the Hazare campaign may not be apt: there is, however, a sense in which one argues that the latter became a vehicle of mass protest, like the former, since the prevalent political regime lost its credibility, to a significant extent, following the unearthing of scams confirming the charges of the embezzlement of tax payers' money and also abuse of government authority for private enrichment. Hazare's clarion call for radical institutional changes which he articulated by insisting on a Leviathan- type *Lokpal*, thus immediately created a constituency of support among those of the middle class who did not seem to have reaped the benefits of economic liberalization to the extent they had expected, because of misgovernance which so far remained almost unaddressed in the absence of a strong institutional mechanism.

 But Hazare's insistence on a draconian Lokpal seemed to have caused a fissure even among those who also felt that corruption needed to be curbed to ensure public well- being in the real sense of the term. The most articulate critique of the Lokpal bill happens to be the one that Arundhati Roy had provided by saying that

while his means may be Gandhian, Anna Hazare's demands are certainly not. Contrary to Gandhiji's ideas about the decentralization of power, the Jan Lokpal Bill is a draconian, anti- corruption law, in which a panel of carefully chosen people will administer a giant bureaucracy, with thousands of employees, with the power to police, everybody from the Prime Minister, the judiciary, members of Parliament, and all of the bureaucracy, down to the lowest government official. The Lokpal will have the power of investigation, surveillance and prosecution. Except for the fact that it won't have its own prisons, it will function as an independent administration, meant to counter the bloated, unaccountable, corrupt one that we already have. Two oligarchs, instead of just one.58

So, the creation of 'a Leviathan- like Lokpal, based on the concept of ombudsman in Western societies',59 is contrary to the basic ethos of democracy which builds a collective will through contestations, deliberations and negotiations. By arguing for creating a centralized institution of the state, the Jan Lokpal Bill seems to have drawn on Anna Hazare's personal experience at Ralegaon Siddhi where he, being projected as a messiah, rose to become an undisputed leader who was barely challenged by his followers. This is also undemocratic because 'messianism substitutes the collective subject, the staple in democracy, by an individual subject, the messiah'.60 The argument was further pursued by the analyst who stated that

the people may participate in large numbers, and with great enthusiasm and support in the activities undertaken by the messiah, as they are doing

reportedly at Anna Hazare's fast . . ., but they do so as spectators. The action is of the messiah; the people are only enthusiastic and partisan supporters and cheerleaders. If at all they ever undertake any action on the side, this is entirely at the messiah's bidding, its ethics, rationale and legitimacy never explained to them (no need is felt for doing so); whenever they march it is only in support of the messiah, not for specific demands that they have internalized and fell passionately about. When they gather [around Hazare], for instance, the occasion is not used to enlighten them, to bring home to them the nuances of the differences between the government's Lokpal Bill and the Jan Lokpal Bill, so that they could act with discrimination and understanding. On the contrary, the idea is to whip up enthusiasm among them without enlightening them, through the use of meaningless hyperbole like 'the government bill is meant not for the prevention but for the promotion of corruption' and 'Anna is India and India is Anna'. If the venue was one where discussions, debates and informative speeches were taking place, the matter would [have been] different, but those alas have no place in the political activity around messianism.61

 This is a core structural limitation of the campaign that Hazare had launched to weed out corruption, which was defined too narrowly, as 'a moral problem to be addressed only at the level of individual'.62 Also, it was assumed that, being an unchallenged messiah, the image that Hazare had built in Ralegaon Siddhi was adequately equipped to force the state to accept the Jan Lokpal Bill in its undiluted form. In the process, not only are the values of democracy compromised by encouraging the role of a messiah, the issue of structural inequality contributing to the glaring socio- economic imbalances becomes peripheral, if not entirely insignificant, in what is redefined as democratic struggles in the elite discourse.

Is corruption just a matter of legality, of financial irregularity and bribery, or is it the currency of a social transaction in an egregiously unequal society, in which power continues to be concentrated in the hands of a smaller and smaller minority?

asks the socio- political activist, Arundhati Roy.63 In his scheme of things, the wider social context seems to have been entirely ignored, because Hazare felt that substantial social progress could be achieved once the evil politicians and their cohorts in government administration were shown the door. He was thus criticized for being silent when 'reckless and rapacious economic transformations had proceeded unchecked . . . [through] illegal mining and land acquisitions for special economic zones . . . [at the cost of] marginal farmers and indigenous communities'.64 It is true that he had just one objective – the creation of a powerful Lokpal – with other issues remaining peripheral. That, however, does not mean that they were not important in his ideological preferences, as his statements following the fast had shown. Within a week of his fast, Hazare had

broadened his demands beyond corruption to issues such as farmers' rights to land, the rights of labourers to humane conditions of works and even nuclear non- proliferation, which did not seem to please his supporters among the Hindu right wing.65 He acquired important allies, such as social activist Medha Patkar, who is known for her guiding role in the Narmada Bachao Andolon (Save Narmada Movement), a social movement opposed to the construction of an ecologically destructive mega- dam on the Narmada river. Patkar is also a key organizer for the National Alliance for People's Movements, a broad alliance of social movements that has resisted various initiatives of the post- liberalized Indian state through the use of Gandhian means. Patkar's steadfast support has lent the Hazare movement a measure of credibility that other high profile allies (including the Bollywood stars or sports personalities) could not possibly provide. In a statement pledging support to Hazare, Patkar and her colleagues connected the battle against corruption with 'wider struggles against corporatization, capitalism, communalism, casteism, patriarchy, criminality and consumerism'.66

 In his battle against corruption, Hazare, unlike his militant counterparts, always remained true to the fundamental ethos of parliamentary politics. Accepting parliament as supreme in democratic governance, he thus made an appeal to the parliamentarians to make a stringent law to contain corruption. He never called for 'regime change' nor did he dispute 'the parliament's authority to make laws'.67 The Jan Lokpal remains, so far, shelved largely due to the absence of a consensus among the civil society activists and also the government over its authority, despite the agreement that India needs a strong ombudsman. The idea has, in other words, an appeal among the political parties, cutting across ideological preferences though when it is sought to be articulated in the form of an institution they do not seem to hold identical views. There can be plenty of reasons. One of them is perhaps the lack of moral courage to allow an institution of governance to exercise legal and also substantial authority, given the public backing over especially the errant politicians to arrest deviation from the established code of conduct. By recognizing moral values as critical to governance, the Lokpal is thus a powerful ideological voice in favour of a political system that will be resilient enough to counter the rise of Frankenstein's monster.

 Besides giving a jolt to the system of governance, the Anna Hazare campaign catapulted the issue of corruption onto the centre stage of Indian politics. There is no denying the fact that the issues were always there in the public domain, but did not receive the limelight that they did following the 2011 India Against Corruption movement. Hence it is argued that what Hazare had initiated with his fast- unto-death vow in 2011

will be remembered for forcing doors when no one else would – for jolting India into starting a countrywide discussion on corruption, of a scale that small, locally rooted civil society groups could not possible hope to initiate. Team Anna could certainly pave the way for change on a grand scale by building a multifaceted and inclusive alliance against corruption, not only individual acts of corruption by unethical public servants, but also processes that have precipitated some of the most injurious forms of corruption adversely affecting India's moral fabric.68

 The movement fizzled out and the goal remains elusive. Yet, the Hazare campaign brought refreshing insights in Indian politics not only in its nature but also in how it was articulated. With the involvement of the middle class and its critical role in ideologically charting the course of action for the campaign, Anna Hazare can be said to have created a format of politics in which the role of the numerically strong and financially well- placed middle class is formally recognized. It has thus been aptly suggested that the 2011 campaign was able 'to employ Gandhian motifs to popularize an urban middle class worry that has had, until now, less currency in India'.69 Their presence, both at the level of leadership and also as participants became an important source of strength which confirms that socially they need to be taken seriously, especially when they are united over an issue. Corruption brought the disgruntled middle class together and Anna Hazare became their messiah. By being integral to the campaign, the middle class also seems to have regained the lost ground in Indian politics. They are now not being led, but are also capable of being a leader, if necessary. This is perhaps the most valuable contribution of the 2011 India Against Corruption campaign. Today, it is corruption that created a platform; tomorrow it could be the reckless extraction by foreign multinational corporations of minerals from across the country, which, if allowed, would surely affect the middle class in view of its overall impact on economic growth. So, the middle class cannot remain immune, once the paradigm of growth- at-any- cost is accepted as inevitable. In that respect, the 2011 Anna Hazare campaign is a milestone in contemporary Indian politics because, not only has it brought the issue of corruption in public life into common reckoning, it has also created a legitimate space for the middle class which did not seem to have played a critical role in India's development trajectory especially in the aftermath of the acceptance to the 1991 policy of economic liberalization.

# **Concluding observations**

Corruption seems to be instinctively linked with human nature; so are the efforts to weed out its roots. The dialectical interconnection between corruption and the consolidation of public opinion needs to be understood to conceptualize the phenomenon in a historical perspective. This is articulated in the argument that, while corruption, in one form or another, has always existed, there have always been well- defined policy measures that have made a significant dent in it. Implicit here is the fact that corruption cannot be completely ruled out; what is feasible is to contain the incidence by creating an environment in which values of ethics, integrity and morality are deeply rooted. It is true that institutionalized legal means are a deterrent to corruption; they cannot, however, be sufficient to substantially weaken its base unless a propitious environment complements the endeavours. The ideological milieu that the 1975 J P movement had created was translated in the repeal of a large number of draconian laws (codified in the 1977 Forty- Second Amendment Act) through the *Forty- Third* and *Forty- Fourth Amendment Acts* in 1978. In other words, the fact that mounting public pressure resulted in the abrogation of laws supporting authoritarianism also confirms the critical role that social context plays in shaping a specific ideological stance. Similarly, the insistence on a strong *Lokpal* by those involved in the India Against Corruption campaign of 2011 can also be said to have its roots in the movement that Hazare had launched against the debilitating impact of corruption in India's public life.

 There is one fundamental conceptual point here: corruption and the decline of ethics are dialectically inter- connected; while the former has had 'variegated incidence in different times at different places, with varying degrees of damaging consequences'70 the latter also unfolds gradually and is thus contingent on specific mindsets which either remain indifferent or supportive of 'some sort of malfeasance for private enrichment'.71 There can thus hardly be a universal explanatory model because this interrelationship is also context- driven. For instance, in the erstwhile Licence–Quota–Permit Raj guaranteeing massive discretionary power to those holding public authority, corruption was considered to be 'the much needed grease for the squeaking wheels of rigid administration'.72 Gradually the idea seems to have lost steam. In the mid- 1970s, the efforts towards utilizing government machinery for personal gain provoked mass consternation, which was reflected in the 1975 J P movement. Challenging the ideological design of those in power, the campaign for J P's total revolution created, rather instantaneously, a constituency of support in the country because of the abuse of authority by the powerful at the cost of the ordinary citizen. This was the main factor behind the massive campaign that J P had spearheaded in collaboration with political forces with incompatible ideological predilections. By the time the Anna Hazare led the campaign for the Jan Lokpal Bill in 2011, it was clear that public offices were utilized for personal gains with the revelation of scams involving the transaction of huge financial benefits for those in governance. What is striking is the fact that those who are responsible for managing governance in India tend to be corrupt because of the excessive importance of public authority in India's development trajectory. It is true that the state seems to have lost its determining role in the economy in contrast with what it had in the earlier dispensation of state- driven economic development; nonetheless, even in the changed socio- ideological milieu, the Indian state continues to remain a significant player, especially in disbursing money for development and also in extending favour to the private operators to initiate business ventures in exchange for kickbacks. The 2G spectrum scam and illegal appropriation of government funds to prepare for the 2010 Commonwealth Games in Delhi are illustrative here. The Hazare movement may not have achieved its goal, but it fulfilled a historical mission by articulating the middle- class frustration in the form a nation- wide campaign against corruption.

 There is a continuing thread linking the 1975 J P movement with its 2011 counterpart, led by an army subaltern, Anna Hazare. As shown above, in the battle against the derailment of public authority in two different phases of India's

recent political history, both J P and Hazare emerged as undisputed leaders holding hegemonic control over the movement for probity in governance. They became, in other words, messiahs to save Indians from crises. By encouraging individual- based leadership, these movements were criticized as undemocratic in character; there was not a mechanism to replace the hegemonic individual leaders because of their charismatic ability to guide their massive followers in accordance with what they felt appropriate at the particular historical juncture. This is definitely a bad side of messianism that creates a situation in which the will of the leader is carried forward since he/she has a majority to back his/her claim even at the cost of the constitution and institutions of parliamentary governance. Neither the Constitution of India nor the constitutionally guaranteed institutions can be overturned by the wishes of the majority at a particular time. 'If perchance', thus argues an analyst, we

accept messianism out of expediency, it would be violating the spirit of the Constitution and undermining democracy. Besides, any such licence will make multiple (quasi- religious) messiahs sprout, who compete and collude, as oligopolists do in the markets for goods, to keep people in thralldom.73

Nonetheless, it is fair to argue that the campaigns that J P and Anna Hazare had spearheaded were a product of circumstances in which public frustration reached its zenith. It was possible for them to trigger movements, given their unassailable public images. They became messiahs in the absence of leaders who had the Gandhian capability of uniting socio- economically and also ideologically disparate masses for a common cause. One of the reasons which sustained their popularity was perhaps the use of civil disobedience methods and also the invocation of Gandhi who continues to remain ideologically inspiring, especially in movements challenging an authoritarian state or tendencies of political authorities towards being authoritarian. So, at a particular point of history, messiahs are required to quell anti- democratic forces, despite the fact that there is always an implicit danger, as history has demonstrated, in uncritically championing messianism in political mobilization.

# **Notes**

- 1 Joseph Nye, 'Corruption and political development: a cost- benefit analysis' in Arnold J Heidenheimer, Michael Johnston and Victor T LeVine (eds), *Political Corruption: a handbook*, Transaction Publishers, New Brunswick, 1989, p. 966.
- 2 Sara Shumer, 'Machiavelli: republican politics and its corruption', *Political Theory*, 7 (1), 1979, p. 9 – quoted in Peter Bratsis, 'Corrupt Compared to What? Greece, capitalist interests and the specular purity of the state', discussion paper no. 8, London School of Economics and Political Science, 2003, [www.eprints.lse.ac.uk/5696/1/](http://www.eprints.lse.ac.uk/5696/1/corrupt_compared_to_what.pdf) [corrupt\\_compared\\_to\\_what.pdf,](http://www.eprints.lse.ac.uk/5696/1/corrupt_compared_to_what.pdf) p. 9.
- 3 Albert Hirschman, *The Passions and Interests*, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1977, p. 40.
- 4 [www.eprints.lse.ac.uk/5696/1/corrupt\\_compared\\_to\\_what.pdf.](http://www.eprints.lse.ac.uk/5696/1/corrupt_compared_to_what.pdf) Peter Bratsis, 'Corrupt Compared to What?, p. 16.