- Scheper-Hughes, N. (1991). Virgin territory: The male discovery of the clitoris. *Medical Anthropology Quarterly, 5*(1), 25–28.
- Schwartz, R. L. (1994). Multiculturalism, medicine and the limits of autonomy: The practice of female circumcision. *Cambridge Quarterly of Healthcare Ethics, 3*, 431–437.
- Shell-Duncan, B. (2001). The medicalization of female "circumcision": Harm reduction or promotion of a dangerous practice? *Social Science and Medicine, 52*, 1013–1028.
- Shell-Duncan, B., Obiero, W. O., & Muruli, L. A. (2000). Women without choices: The debate over medicalization of female genital cutting and its impact on a northern Kenyan community. In B. Shell-Duncan & Y. Hernlund (Eds.), *Female "circumcision" in Africa: Culture, controversy, and change* (pp. 109–128). Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner.
- Shweder, R. (2000). What about female genital mutilation? And why understanding culture matters in the first place (Abridged). *Daedalus, 129*, 209–232.
- Skramstad, H. (1990). *The fluid meanings of female circumcision in a multiethnic context in Gambia: Distribution of knowledge and linkages to sexuality*. Bergen, Norway: Christian Michelson Institute.

- Thomas, L. (1996). "Ngaitana (I will circumcise myself)": The gender and generational politics of the 1956 ban on clitoridectomy in Meru, Kenya. *Gender and History, 8*(3), 338–363.
- Thomas, L. (2000). "Ngaitana (I will circumcise myself)": Lessons from colonial campaigns to ban excision in Meru, Kenya. In B. Shell-Duncan & Y. Hernlund (Eds.), *Female "circumcision" in Africa: Culture controversy, and change* (pp. 129–150). Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner.
- Toubia, N. (1988). *Women and health in Sudan*. London: Zed Press.
- Toubia, N., & Izett, S. (1998). *Female genital mutilation: An overview*. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization.
- United Nations (1986). *Report of the Working Group on Traditional Practices Affecting the Health of Women and Children*. Geneva, Switzerland: United Nations Sub Commission for the Prevention of Discrimination and the Protection of Minorities, Special Working Group on Traditional Practices.
- van der Kwaak, A. (1992). Female circumcision and gender identity: A questionable alliance? *Social Science & Medicine, 35*(6), 777–787.

# **Immunization**

### **Global Programs, Local Acceptance and Resistance**

#### **Anita Hardon**

### **INTRODUCTION**

Until recently immunization as object of investigation was limited to public health researchers and historians of science and medicine (Basch, 1994; Greenough, 1980). Immunization became a more popular topic for anthropological enquiry in the 1970s, when global immunization programs aimed at "universal coverage" were launched. Anthropologists were invited by global health agencies such as the World Health Organization (WHO) to help identify structural and cultural barriers to achieving increased immunization coverage. More recently there has been attention to broader issues, including the processes through which immunization comes to be institutionalized as a routine practice in public health management, at the global, national, and local levels; and there are wider issues pertaining to popular conceptions of immunity, the role of global institutions,

and notions of citizenship and consent (Das, Das, & Coutinho, 2000).

### **THE HISTORY OF IMMUNIZATION**

The history of modern vaccination goes back to the late 18th century when Jenner developed a smallpox vaccine based on cowpox. Before that time in Asia and Europe, the practice of variolation prevailed. Variolation means deliberately inoculating a susceptible person with smallpox virus, usually with matter taken from pustules of someone who had caught the disease by natural contagion. For reasons not well understood, the inocullee got an attenuated case of smallpox with less severe illness symptoms which was very rarely fatal and conferred immunity from further infections (Greenough, 1980). Native variolators were reported in Bengal from at least 1731. Modern vaccination was probably the most important reason behind the disappearance of smallpox as an endemic disease in Europe during the course of the 19th century. In developing countries, smallpox remained a leading cause of death.

In the 19th and 20th centuries a wide range of vaccines, based either on live or attenuated bacterial matter, were developed (Basch, 1994). Until the 1960s, however, the use of vaccines was limited mainly to industrializing countries. Globally orchestrated mass immunization programs were set up in the 1970s starting with the Smallpox Eradication Campaign which was implemented under the auspices of the WHO. Building on the success of this campaign the WHO launched the Expanded Program on Immunization (EPI) in 1974. At the time less than 5% of the world's children were immunized against the six target diseases selected for inclusion in the EPI. For each of these six—diphtheria, tetanus, whooping cough, polio, measles, and tuberculosis—vaccines could be procured at very low cost. The six vaccines were already established as safe and effective. Through acceleration of the EPI in the 1980s 80% of the world's children under 13 months of age globally were provided with BCG, OPV3, and measles vaccines by 1990 (Basch, 1994; UNICEF, 1996; WHO, 1992).

## **STUDYING GLOBAL IMMUNIZATION EFFORTS**

The assumption underlying the global immunization efforts was that interventions and knowledge developed globally are applicable in diverse local contexts. The EPI developed blueprints that were to be implemented top-down by national governments. The EPI established standard vaccination schedules and surveillance procedures. It provided training and managerial support to national programs and developed promotional materials. Anthropologists were involved in the EPI by investigating why people in diverse sociocultural settings do not comply with the global immunization regimes (Heggenhougen & Clements, 1987). Very little anthropological enquiry has been done on the immunization policy-making process itself. Anthropologists tend to define policies as context, or macro structures which influence people's lives (Justice, 1987; Shore & Wright, 1997).

Global immunization policies such as smallpox eradication and the EPI are guided by powerful cultural assumptions and political interests. They make use of catch phrases such as "universal coverage" which have important political functions: ideologically they provide a shared aim behind which different stakeholders can rally, whilst in practice they help mobilize support from various global actors, including UN agencies, donors, private foundations, and industry. They help mobilize collective energies behind collective goals and they help sustain the hope that the aims can be achieved and project an imagery of possible and intrinsically beneficial public health programs. Policies change over time in response to changes in global public health paradigms and resource flows. The EPI, for example, was followed in 1988 by a new initiative which aimed to *eradicate polio by the year 2000*, partly in response to increased resources available for this campaign from Rotary International at a time when a more disease-controloriented Director General took over the leadership of the WHO (Walt, 1993; WHO, 1997).

In the 1990s there was a growing emphasis on technical approaches to the problems confronting immunization programs (Children's Vaccination Initiative, 1997; Hardon, 2001; Starling, Brugha, Walt, Heaton, & Keith, 2002). Interesting analysis of the trend toward technological innovations has been done by the medical historian Muraskin (1990, 1998). He describes how the Children's Vaccine Initiative (CVI) was created as an attempt to revolutionize the way vaccines were developed for the developing world. It was formed, in part, out of optimism that the scientific advances of the biotechnology revolution could be harnessed to create new and improved vaccines. Initially the CVI aimed to develop a single childhood vaccine that would combine all the necessary antigens. Muraskin looked at the indispensable role played by pivotal individuals (William Foege of the Task Force for Child Survival, Kenneth Warren & Scott Halstead of the Rockefeller Foundation, James Grant & James Sherry of UNICEF, & D. A. Henderson of Johns Hopkins University) without whom the CVI would not have come into existence. While these individuals worked within the confines created by the large social, economic, and political changes that shaped the 1980s, their goals, often targeted at fairly limited objectives, were crucial in determining the final outcome. Muraskin points to the role of individual choice and serendipity in determining major policy decisions and argues that these are underestimated in the social science literature.

## **VACCINATION PROGRAMS, THEIR CULTURE AND CONTEXT**

Global policy-making processes have been studied more by medical historians and health policy scientists than by medical anthropologists. Medical anthropologists have focused on the implementation of immunization programs and the acceptability of vaccines in diverse sociocultural settings. They have shown how at the local level immunization programs are characterized by a targetoriented approach and emphasis on strict adherence to vaccination rules and procedures that have been developed in an international setting (Banjeri, 1990). Usually, the organizational culture of vaccination programs combines an emphasis on strict adherence to many rules with strong social control through monitoring of the achievement of targets (Nichter, 1990; Onta, Sabroe, & Hansen, 1998; Streefland, 1989). Onta et al. (1998) report that Primary Health Care Service Outlets (PHSOs) and the district health office in Nepal responded to the targetorientation by exaggerating coverage. The PHSOs reported numbers of immunized children to the district health office even in months when no children were entered in the immunization register in the outlets. Similarly, the district health office reported the number of immunized children to the national government even in months when no report had been received from the PHSOs. Nichter (1990) describes how mid-level health personnel and their superiors in South India associated immunization programs with military campaigns. It did not matter what people knew or did not know about vaccines, they said. The effort depends on good logistics, and compliance. As one South Asian planner comments: "The beauty of vaccination programs is that they require little from the community beyond lining up and holding out their arm at the proper time … it matters little whether a soldier understands how the rifle he uses works as long as he knows how to aim, load and shoot. It is the same with vaccinations" (Nichter, 1990, p.197).

Another anthropological enquiry in India focused on the introduction of a new vaccine, hepatitis B, in the East Delhi Immunization program (Addlakha & Grover, 2000). This program was launched with the WHO in 1996. Addlakha and Grover did ethnographic fieldwork with an aim of (1) understanding the way in which the discourses of public health officials are framed within a meta-discourse of population regulation or biopower, and (2) exploring the lived experiences of actual users negotiating with health problems in specific local settings. They argue that immunization programs regulate populations through a strategic alliance between the "immunizing state," multinational pharmaceutical companies, and the medical profession. In the case of hepatitis B vaccination, clinicians from different medical specialities, multinational pharmaceutical companies, and international organizations were trying to persuade the entire population of India that it was in the grip of a potentially fatal health crisis (liver cancer due to the hepatitis B virus) for which the vaccine is the only preventative. A sense of urgency was conveyed by comparing the hepatitis B threat to that of HIV/AIDS. The authors question the rationale for the introduction of hepatitis B vaccine given that there were in fact no accurate prevalence figures in India, and that small-scale studies showed moderate levels of endemicity (4–5%). They also revealed a controversy about the selection of vaccineproduct. While a local company in India produced hepatitis B vaccine and could provide it to government at low cost, a multinational company was found to be pressuring the government to include its hepatitis B vaccine in the Indian immunization program. Conducting multi-sited ethnography, the researchers examined notions of hepatitis in East Delhi communities. They find that most people were not aware of "hepatitis" as an illness category. Only 17/50 respondents had heard of the term through newspapers or mass-media reports. They could not delineate symptoms or treatment. The public health officials overcame this problem by promoting the vaccine as treatment for *pilia*, a local term for jaundice, literally meaning yellowness in Hindi. Nurses described the vaccine as *pilia ka teeka*', injection for jaundice (*pilia* is treated in the communities with herbal medicines).

Nichter (1990) and Addlaka and Grover (2000) analyzed immunization programs as modes of surveillance and control of populations, which could be defined as biopower (Foucault, 1979). In the area of immunization, bodily states such as *pilia* are defined as being "vaccinepreventable," opening up the way for legitimate intervention by the "immunizing" state. Most anthropological studies on immunization aim not to analyze the role of the "immunizing state" and mechanisms of biopower, but rather focus on ways in which the operations of the immunization programs can be facilitated, and the target populations more effectively and efficiently reached. Such studies focus on health beliefs and structural factors that act as barriers for acceptance of vaccinations.

#### **Active Demand, Passive Acceptance 265**

In a review of social science studies on childhood immunization Heggenhougen and Clements (1987) recommended that in order to achieve a high level of coverage, the global immunization program blueprint would have to be adjusted to its sociocultural environment. Sustained high levels of vaccination coverage, they argued, are only possible when vaccination services are easily accessible and when parents take their children there at the time indicated by the immunization schedule. Whether the children attend regularly and on time will partly depend on the perceived quality of the services, including whether or not outreach clinics are held on time, mothers are treated with respect, and vaccines are available. Parents' confidence in vaccination technology, their calculation of the chance of harm through sideeffects and of health protection through vaccination, and the social control of the community are other determining factors. Seasonal working schedules, nomadic travel patterns, and local ideas about risk are among the sociocultural elements which vaccinators and program managers need to take into consideration when implementing their vaccination program.

### **OVERCOMING STRUCTURAL BARRIERS**

Such applied studies have specifically pointed at the need to consider service-level factors, which matter to people in their day-to-day interactions with immunization programs (Heggenhougen & Clements, 1987; Salkever, 1976; Streefland, Chowdury, & Ramos-Jiminez, 1999), including:

1. *Convenience of time and space*: Many studies have pointed to the need to provide immunization services at convenient times and places that are easy for the "target" population to reach. In the EPI blueprint, vaccination services were designed to be vertical programs, which from a programmatic point of view are easier to manage and control (Walsh & Warren, 1980). However, from the perspective of users a more multi-pronged approach is more appropriate, offering community-based immunization, schools vaccination programs, and opportunities for vaccination during curative consultations, in addition to the routine vaccinations events (Dietz & Cutts, 1997). Waiting and travel times are also relevant factors. A study in Bangladesh found that poor women could not pay the fares to local static vaccination facilities. In Ethiopia women of unimmunized children complained that they could not carry their children the long distance between their home and the clinics (Streefland et al., 1999). A combination of static services, mobile outreach efforts, and school programs is suggested to be the most successful approach to increasing coverage. Gender issues may affect the accessibility of vaccination sessions. In Bangladesh, where the seclusion of women is widespread, mothers themselves did not like to be vaccinated with tetanus toxoid by male vaccinators, but had no objections if their children were (Chowdury, Aziz, & Bhuiya, 1998).

- 2. *Staff attitudes*: The sociocultural difference between staff and recipient, and the general attitude of staff toward recipients were found to be significant. A multi-country study (Streefland et al., 1999) found that health workers often behave impolitely. In Malawi, for example, health workers were reported to shout at women who arrived late. They worked slowly and stopped at midday even if there was still a long line of women waiting for the services (Chilowa & Munthali, 1999). In the Philippines, health workers reportedly were angry if mothers forgot to bring their vaccination cards (Ramos-Jiminez, Rodrigues, Patino, & Lim, 1999).
- 3. *Social exclusion processes*: Several studies have pointed to the low immunization rates in marginalized population groups. A study in Britain found that severely handicapped or disadvantaged groups were less frequently immunized (Berkeley, 1983). A study in India found that scheduled caste women and their children were denied access to a community home where vaccination sessions were held until the children of higher caste women had been vaccinated. Scheduled castes are groups in India with a very low position in the social hierarchy based on their supposed ritual impurity (SSIM/India, 1998).
- 4. *Communication on effects*: An emphasis on coverage has meant that immunization programs have emphasized the benefits of immunization over risks. Anthropological studies have shown that experiences with side-effects such as fever, abcesses, and pain can limit future acceptability of vaccines. Mothers also do not want to have immunizations given to their sick children. Sick children are considered especially vulnerable. Health workers know about the concern of their clients, and they know that they will be blamed if side-effects occur. In practice, they therefore do warn about side-effects, and are reluctant to immunize sick children (Heggenhougen & Clements, 1987; WHO, 1998).

## **ACTIVE DEMAND, PASSIVE ACCEPTANCE**

Apart from structural barriers, health belief studies also aim at identifying and finding solutions to cultural barriers to vaccination acceptance. Acceptance of vaccinations can, according to Nichter (1995), be differentiated into active demand and passive acceptance. Active demand "entails adherence to vaccination programs by an informed public which perceives the benefits of and need for specific vaccinations. Passive acceptance denotes compliance: passive acceptance of vaccinations by a public which yields to the recommendations and social pressure, if not prodding, of health workers and community leaders" (Nichter, 1995, p.617). Others (Streefland et al., 1999) have suggested that such a dichotomy is not sensitive enough to variations in actual vaccination behavior. Acceptance, it is argued, can be more or less active. Despite efforts to deliver vaccines virtually to every child's doorstep worldwide, empirical studies suggest that mothers have to overcome substantial barriers to get their children vaccinated. As mentioned above, they have to walk far, or wait for a long time before being attended to. Is such acceptance passive? Or is it active demand?

Insight into vaccination acceptance and demand requires an understanding of local notions of disease etiology. Very few studies have explored these in relation to interpretations of vaccine efficacy, reflecting perhaps a neglect in medical anthropology for preventive medicine. Many more studies have been done on indigenous notions of therapeutic medicine (Van der Geest, Reynolds, Whyte, & Hardon, 1996). In their study among the Bambara of Mali, Imperato and Traore (1969) point out that the Bambara perceived a vaccination to be an amulet that works if Koranic charms and diviners' incantations have failed. Just as amulets need to be renewed, so vaccinations are seen to be timebound. In Indonesia mothers who do not fully vaccinate their children were found to believe that their children are healthy, and therefore not in need of further vaccinations (Nichter, 1995). In the view of the mothers it was the quantity, and not the quality of the distinct vaccinations that mattered. And, Mull, Anderson, and Mull (1990) describe how in the Hindu Kush region of Pakistan, tetanus-toxoid (TT) vaccines given to mothers are seen to prevent or cure Khudakan, an illness associated with neonatal tetanus. Khudakan, according to their respondents, is caused by spirits passed on from the mother to the child. One reason that TT vaccination was accepted is that it is congruent with local beliefs. Others have reported that mothers do not have faith in the power of the vaccine to prevent disease; rather they expect the vaccine to reduce the severity of the disorder (Odebiyi & Ekong, 1982).

Congruence with local notions of disease etiology and vaccine efficacy clearly affects the extent to which people accept and demand vaccines. When they believe that the vaccines have a general protective effect, and serious illness still occurs, individual mothers may decide against further vaccination of their children. Refusal to vaccinate is then based on individual weighing of costs and benefits. In the above cited case on the promotion of hepatitis B vaccine in Delhi as protection against *pilia* (jaundice), the authors note that medically, jaundice can be caused by different types of hepatitis. Hepatitis A is common in the community and this vaccine does not protect against it. The authors argue that a future problem for the hepatitis B immunization program is that it will in fact not prevent jaundice from occurring. If a child, despite having been vaccinated, falls ill with *pilia* (caused by hepatitis A) then the mother's faith in the immunization program may be shattered (Addlakha & Grover, 2000).

### **RESISTANCE TO VACCINATION REGIMES**

When vaccination was introduced by colonial governments in the last century resistance was a rather common response. Presently, collective resistance occurs for religious reasons: when parents reject protection through vaccination because they consider this unjustified interference with God's will or because their explanatory model of how a child ought to gain resistance against a disease is at odds with the biomedical model. Collective resistance may also occur when the population distrusts the state (Streefland, 2001), when the media report adverse effects or undisclosed aims (e.g., sterilization of pregnant women by way of the TT vaccination).

A survey on the acceptance of vaccination among different ethnic groups in the Netherlands found more informed resistance among highly educated white populations (Hardon, Streefland, Egers, & Gerrits, 1998). Reasons for non-acceptance are the belief that childhood illnesses play a role in the development of children. Parents specifically refuse the MMR (measles, mumps, and rubella) vaccination because the diseases against which the vaccine works are not considered life-threatening. Plochg and van Staa (2002) have labeled this view as a "balancing attitude." For each vaccine, parents make a balance of risks and benefits. Their critical attitude is part of a more general lifestyle in which organic food is preferred and environmental pollution avoided. It also reflects a more informed and critical attitude toward health services. Increasingly through the Internet, patients are finding their own information sources and confronting health workers with alternative paradigms for health, such as the hygiene hypothesis, which suggests that vaccines can in fact distort the development of the immune system.

In the Philippines, Ramos-Jiminez et al. (1999) report how the TT vaccination campaign ran into difficulties

#### **References 267**

when a rumor spread that the vaccinations were aimed at reducing the fertility of women. The rumors were spread by pro-life nun, Sr. Pilar Versoza, who had read reports from Mexico where the TT vaccine was reportedly contaminated with human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG), the hormone which is released during pregnancy. The nun demanded that the TT vaccines be tested, and "minimal traces" of HCG were found by one of the two testing centers. The controversy led to much unrest about the safety of TT vaccines, which at the time were included in the mass-immunization campaigns against polio. Women believed that TT vaccination could cause miscarriages and immunization coverage went down from 80% to as low as 20%–25%. The controversy also affected the coverage of measles vaccines. Underlying the controversy in the Philippines is distrust in the benevolence of the state's public health programs.

Media reports on adverse effects are often the cause for collective resistance to vaccination. Banerjea and Coutinho (2000) report that resistance against polio vaccine grew in India when three children died during the first phase of the polio-eradication campaign. The authors examine the blame-assigning discourses, while attempting to map the varied and plural responses to the events in the media, state, and community. One of the mothers reported how her child had been ill prior to receiving the vaccine. She had doubted whether it was good to have the vaccine. All parents of the children who had become ill and died did not blame the vaccine, the authors note, but the administration procedure. The competence of the vaccinators was in question. The events led to refusal to have children vaccinated in the subsequent phases of the campaign. The health planners blamed the resistance on the people's ignorance. As one active participant in the polio campaign commented: " People are ignorant. Our religious leaders are against pulse polio. They say if you have pulse polio, you will become sterile. People are thus scared." And another comments "I constantly let them know about the benefits of immunization. … but they don't understand" (Banerjea & Coutinho, 2000, pp.715–716).

## **IN ANTICIPATION OF FUTURE RESISTANCE**

Vaccine administrators fear that with the increased flows of information accompanying globalization, immunization resistance will increase. Such resistance is considered especially problematic when new vaccines are introduced. In contrast, existing vaccines tend to become part of local health cultures and are viewed with less suspicion. Hardon (1998) describes how a global network of women's health organizations successfully opposed experiments with antifertility vaccines. The women's health groups feared that the vaccines would disrupt their immune systems and lead to menstrual disorders. Anticipating resistance, anthropologists have been asked to conduct cultural feasibility studies in preparation for AIDS vaccine trials. The aim of such studies is to investigate AIDS-related beliefs, acceptability of the vaccine to trial participants, and community reactions and repercussions to the trial (Coreil et al., 1998). In the conclusions of such studies, anthropologists recommend in-depth educational preparations of trial populations ensuring that the effects of the vaccine, and the design of trials (including placebo groups), are understood. Streefland (2002), reviewing findings on acceptability of vaccines, suggests that the most important determinant of future acceptance of AIDS vaccines is better quality vaccination practices by health staff. When a vaccine is introduced for a prevailing deadly disease such as AIDS, vaccination demand is likely to be great.

### **REFERENCES**

- Addlakha, R., & Grover, A. (2000). User configuration and perspective: Hepatitis B introductory trial in East Delhi. *Economic and Political Weekly*, *35*(8/9), 736–744.
- Banerjea, N., & Coutinho, L. (2000). Social production of blame: Case study of OPV-related deaths in West Bengal. *Economic and Political Weekly*, *25*(8/9), 709–718.
- Banjeri, D. (1990). Crash of the immunization program: Consequences of a totalitarian approach. *International Journal of Health Services*, *20*(3), 501–510.
- Basch, P. F. (1994). *Vaccines and world health: Science policy and practice*. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
- Berkeley, M. I. K. (1983). Measles—the effect of attitudes on immunization. *Health Bulletin, 41*, 141–147.
- Chilowa, W., & Munthali, A. (1999). *Immunization in Malawi*. Amsterdam: Spinhuis.
- Chowdury, A. M. R., Aziz, K. M. A., & Bhuiya, A. (1998). *The near miracle revisited. Social science perspectives of the immunization programme in Bangladesh*. Amsterdam: Spinhuis.
- Coreil, J., Losikoff, P., Pincu, R., Mayard, G., Ruff, A. J., Hausler, H. P., Desormeau, J., Davis, H., & Boulos, R. (1998). Cultural feasibility studies in preparation for clinical trials to reduce maternal–infant HIV transmission in Haiti. *AIDS Education and Prevention, 10*(1), 46–62.
- Children's Vaccination Initiative (1997). *The CVI strategic plan: Managing opportunity and change. A vision of vaccination for the 21st century*. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.