# **JURISDICTION**

#### RAEESA VAKIL

#### **I. INTRODUCTION**

FOR Dr BR Ambedkar, chairman of the Drafting Committee of India's Constituent Assembly, a unified judicial structure was the means to 'have uniformity in the basic matters which are essential to maintain the unity of the country'.<sup> $\frac{1}{2}$ </sup> The Supreme Court, at the head of this unified judiciary, was to play three roles. It would be a constitutional court, interpreting the Constitution, advising the President, and adjudicating disputes between the States and the Union. It would be, in addition, an appellate court, hearing criminal, civil, and other appeals certified to it by High Courts, but with the power to itself choose and hear any appeal, from any order, in any court. And it would be the final court; its judgments binding on all courts below, with powers to render 'complete justice' in all matters, to review its own judgments, and to punish for contempt of its orders. It is no wonder, then, that another member of the Drafting Committee noted of the Court that 'It has wider jurisdiction than any superior court in any part of the world.<sup> $2$ </sup> Indeed, in addition to all these powers, the Supreme Court would also have the role of the enforcer of fundamental rights, with powers to issue writs for this purpose.

This chapter examines the evolution of the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in three aspects—as an appellate court (Section II), a constitutional court (Section III**),** and a 'final' court (Section IV). (I exclude from the scope of this study the Supreme Court's jurisdiction to issue writs for the enforcement of fundamental rights). In the conclusion, bringing these three threads together, I describe a few of the challenges the Court faces today. $3$ 

#### **II. THE APPELLATE COURT**

The immediacy of fundamental rights has led, inevitably, to a focus in contemporary writing on the Supreme Court's jurisdiction to issue writs for their enforcement. $\frac{4}{3}$  This is despite the fact that the Supreme Court is primarily a court of appellate jurisdiction; a disproportionate part of its docket (approximately 80 per cent) consists of appeals.<sup>5</sup> The Constituent Assembly debates bear witness to the fears of the drafters, that the Supreme Court would be 'flooded' with too many appeals.<sup>6</sup> This, in turn, led to the drafting of a carefully considered set of regulations that governed which appeals would finally be heard by the Supreme Court. Despite this care, the Supreme Court has now reached a situation where the number of appeals it considers on a daily basis exceeds its ability to do justice to all of them.

#### **1. The Supreme Court's Appellate Jurisdiction: An Outline**

The Constitution provides that four kinds of appeal may be heard by the Supreme Court:  $\text{civil}$ ;<sup>7</sup> criminal;<sup>8</sup> questions of constitutional interpretation;<sup>9</sup> and appeals by special leave of the Court.<sup>10</sup> In addition, Parliament has the power to allow appeals to the Supreme Court on all matters on which it has legislative powers. A number of statutory enactments of Parliament now provide for appeals to the Supreme Court, from various courts and tribunals. $\frac{11}{1}$ 

Of the four constitutional appeals, criminal appeals alone exist as a matter of right, in cases involving the sentence of the death penalty,  $\frac{12}{1}$  imprisonment for life or more than ten years.  $\frac{13}{1}$  Criminal appeals in other circumstances, like civil appeals or appeals on constitutional interpretation, are dependent on the grant of a certificate from the High Courts, that is, the High Courts control what matters are appealed to the Supreme Court.<sup>14</sup> Civil appeals must be on 'substantial questions of law' of 'public importance'.<sup>15</sup> Appeals concerning matters of interpretation of the Constitution, as discussed subsequently, are admissible regardless of the nature of the matter—civil, criminal, and so on.<sup>16</sup> The fourth kind of appeal, 'special leave appeals', on the other hand, are not dependent on the grant of certificates by the High Court, and can be allowed directly by the Supreme Court, in any case, in any proceeding, from any court or tribunal.<sup>17</sup>

## **2. Uncertainty and Expansion in the Supreme Court's Appellate Jurisdiction**

Three threads emerge from the Supreme Court's approach to its appellate jurisdiction since its creation. First, there was an imbalance in jurisdictional reforms in the 1970s that was not, in turn, corrected by the Court's jurisprudence. Secondly, there has been a broad resistance by the Court to evolving guidelines in the exercise of discretion to hear appeals, and finally, there have been grave inconsistencies in the interpretation of constitutional restrictions on appeals. I discuss each of these threads and their implications below.

#### a. *Imbalance in Jurisdictional Reforms*

Although appeals on constitutional interpretation, special leave, and civil appeals were contained in early drafts of the Constitution, criminal appeals were introduced after much debate in the Constituent Assembly.<sup>18</sup> The inclusion of criminal appeals against the initial views of the Drafting Committee engendered a compromise—a narrow jurisdiction would be granted for appeals on sentences of the death penalty only, with power to the Parliament to expand this if required.<sup>19</sup> In the case of civil appeals, no such leeway was granted—civil appeals were originally a matter of right, provided a pecuniary limit on the value of the suit (originally of Rs 20,000) was met. $\frac{20}{20}$ 

The restrictions on civil and criminal appeals were stringently applied in the initial two decades, and the Court routinely returned matters to the High Court on the grounds that a certificate to appeal ought not to have been granted, or was improperly granted. Jurisdiction in special leave appeals consequently widened, largely to repair injustices caused when civil and criminal cases could not

otherwise be heard on appeal. Thus, the Supreme Court in its initial two decades often granted special leave to appeal under Article 136, sometimes *suo motu*, in cases where it noted that the requirements for civil appeals under Article 133 and criminal appeals under Article 134 were not met. 21

In response to the difficulties faced by litigants, in the early 1970s the jurisdiction for criminal and civil appeals was widened, and Parliament, by the Supreme Court (Enlargement of Criminal Appellate Jurisdiction) Act 1970, introduced additional statutory rights in criminal appeals. Appeals would lie not only for sentences of the death penalty, but also for imprisonment for life, or for imprisonment for a period of not less than ten years. $\frac{22}{12}$  Similarly, following two Law Commission reports,<sup>23</sup> the Constitution (Thirtieth Amendment) Act 1972 removed the financial threshold for civil appeals and allowed them when a 'substantial question of law of general importance' arose.<sup>24</sup> In civil appeals, particularly, the Commission felt that the test of valuation led to 'cases without merit' going to the Supreme Court.<sup>25</sup> The Commission also noted observations to the effect that jurisdiction defined by the value of the suit resulted in discrimination on the grounds of wealth.  $\frac{26}{12}$  ('Admittedly... a line has to be drawn somewhere. We would like to avoid a line that merely divides the rich from the poor ...  $"\frac{27}{2})$ 

The widening of civil and criminal appellate jurisdiction should have led to less 'special leave' being granted, particularly in cases where the new, wider restrictions on such appeals were not met. As Dr Dhavan documents, this is not the case, and after the early 1970s, the number of special leave appeals of this nature only increased. $\frac{28}{10}$  The alteration of the width of jurisdiction under Article 136 was not contemplated, nor did the Supreme Court, in response, choose to judicially temper the grant of special leave.<sup>29</sup> Today special leave is still granted in instances where the requirements for civil and criminal appeals have not been met. The implication that constitutional restrictions on appeals, therefore, are dispensable, is dangerous, particularly in circumstances where the Court refuses, or neglects to define when it will dispense with these restrictions, and when it will not. As the next section demonstrates, this is the current approach of the Supreme Court.

#### b. *The Absence of Guidelines for the Exercise of Discretion*

Article 136 places tremendous discretion in the hands of the Court to grant special leave, and hear any kind of appeal from any matter, from any court or tribunal. It is common for the Supreme Court to describe this power in an increasingly hyperbolic manner<sup>30</sup> (for instance, 'an untrammelled reservoir of power incapable of being confined by definitional bounds<sup>31</sup>), and to fiercely guard it from any intrusions—whether from lower courts or through statutes. $\frac{32}{3}$ 

This was not the rationale behind granting such width to the Supreme Court: the Constituent Assembly repeatedly expressed two things. First, the assembly was confident that a process of internal restraint would ensure that the High Court would grant certificates sparingly,  $\frac{33}{2}$  just as the Supreme Court would grant leave cautiously.<sup>34</sup> Secondly, they believed that the Supreme Court would evolve principles on the manner of the use of its appellate jurisdiction, not just under Article 136 but under Articles 133 and 134 as well. $35$  The intention, evidently, was that the Supreme Court would regulate itself—a circumstance that has not, as it turns out, evolved.

The Supreme Court has been remarkably resistant to evolving principles to guide its discretion, repeatedly affirming that the power under Article 136, in particular, *cannot* by its nature be defined or controlled.<sup>36</sup> The Court, instead, tends to invoke phrases such as 'grave injustice'<sup>37</sup> or 'shocking the conscience of the court<sup>38</sup> to justify its exercise of discretion. The problems with this approach are eloquently summarised by two commentators on the Constitution. Seervai notes, succinctly, that 'to coin a phrase is not to indicate a standard'.<sup>39</sup> Justice Ruma Pal, a former judge of the Supreme Court, as well, warns that 'This element of emotional subjectivity in the assessment of what constitutes an "injustice" would necessarily result in greater uncertainty in the outcome of a proceeding before the Supreme Court.<sup>240</sup>

Despite the increasing burden of the Court, a vast number of special leave appeals are rejected at the time of applying for special leave. $\frac{41}{1}$  The absence of established principles, however, renders this process somewhat inconsistent; the only standard applied appears to be that of judicial discretion. In 2010, however, the Supreme Court, noting the dramatic rise in special leave petitions and increasing delays, referred to a larger bench of judges several questions, requesting it to formulate 'some broad guidelines as to when the discretion under Article 136 of the Constitution should be exercised, ie, in what kind of cases a petition under Article 136 should be entertained'. $\frac{42}{12}$  Perhaps this decision, when rendered, will clarify the position under Article 136 definitively; however, since the reference was made in 2010 and is yet to be heard, it appears for the moment to have been defeated by some of the problems it set out to address.

#### c. *Inconsistency in Implementing Constitutional Provisions*

Coupled with the Supreme Court's resistance to framing guidelines for the exercise of its discretion, its jurisprudence suffers tremendously from the vice of inconsistency, a problem that is closely related to the practice of the Court of sitting in division benches of two. $\frac{43}{12}$  Coordinate benches of similar strengths will naturally tend towards some discrepancies in interpretation, particularly given the volume of their work. This is very apparent when considering how the Court applies restrictions on the rights to appeal. The Court, when it does choose to evolve principles on the exercise of its discretion, applies them erratically.

The Supreme Court, for instance, in special leave petitions, has permitted, early on, the raising of pleas on points of law that had not been made before lower courts,  $\frac{44}{3}$  but has continued to enunciate that new pleas ought not to be raised for the first time on appeals by special leave. $\frac{45}{1}$  In some cases it has categorically refused to interfere with a lower court's decision entirely on the basis that there were concurrent findings of fact by two lower courts<sup>46</sup> (without considering the merits or legality of such findings) and in others has held that it may go into the questions of a lower court's decision despite concurrent findings of fact by lower courts. $\frac{47}{1}$  In each successive case, the Court is not simply rephrasing a test; it is suggesting new grounds for granting leave in appeals, but in ignorance, or without relying upon previous tests; consequently, from decade to decade, the tests evolve in an apparently arbitrary manner.

# **3. The Appellate Court: Some Concluding Remarks**

The width of the Supreme Court's appellate jurisdiction is extraordinary. A recent quantitative analysis of the Supreme Court's workload indicates that by 2011, 84.6 per cent of the cases heard by the Court were special leave appeals, and 3.1 per cent other kinds of appeals. $\frac{48}{3}$  When the bulk of the Supreme Court's workload is appellate, the implementation of constitutional restrictions on appeals is vital. The Supreme Court's current mode of hearing appeals, however, subverts these restrictions. The result, as demonstrated, is the increase in the workload of the Court, but also in inconsistencies of approach. The appellate jurisdiction of a final court, against which there is no further appeal, cannot afford to be riddled with such uncertainties, and it is hoped that the Supreme Court will take the opportunities it has now been afforded to frame guidelines on special leave appeals. The Supreme Court, as the Constituent Assembly debates indicate, was given untrammelled jurisdiction because it was regarded as an institution that would regulate and correct itself; this impetus must therefore come from within.

## **III. THE CONSTITUTIONAL COURT**

Unusually, the Supreme Court of India functions as both a national court of appeal and a constitutional court. The Constitution in Article 143 empowers the President to refer any question of law or fact to the Supreme Court for its opinion, if he or she feels it 'expedient' to do so. $\frac{49}{12}$  Article 131 of the Constitution vests the Supreme Court with the jurisdiction to hear disputes between States and the Union, or between States inter se.<sup>50</sup> Article 132 empowers it to hear appeals in cases involving a 'substantial question of law as to the interpretation of this Constitution'.  $\frac{51}{1}$  The number of matters that the Supreme Court hears in its capacity as a constitutional court is small,  $\frac{52}{2}$  yet, here it performs functions that have grave consequences, in terms of politics as well as precedent. The first part of this section examines the Court's advisory jurisdiction; the second, the adjudication of federal disputes; and the third, the jurisdiction to interpret the Constitution.

### **1. Advising the President**

Justice Zafrulla Khan of the Federal Court wrote in 1944, that advisory opinions by the Supreme Court's predecessor were 'enveloped in a thick fog of hypotheses and uncertainties and an opinion delivered thereon could only rest upon a forest of assumptions which must rob it of all value'.<sup>53</sup> Advisory opinions rendered by the Supreme Court today face these same challenges, and exacerbate them by holding that these opinions, resting on their 'forests of assumptions', are nevertheless binding statements of law.

The President, by Article 143 of the Constitution, can consult the Supreme Court, if he or she feels it 'expedient' to do so, on any question of law or fact, which is of 'public importance'.  $\frac{54}{1}$  The Presidents, to date, have found it expedient to refer questions of law and fact to the Court fourteen times—of these, the Court has rendered opinions in twelve, <sup>55</sup> declined to render an opinion in one, <sup>56</sup>

and is currently seized of the remaining question.<sup>57</sup>

The constraints on the advisory jurisdiction of the Supreme Court appear to be minimal—the President may refer *any question* of law or fact, and the Court may choose whether it will answer, the sole test being 'expediency' at the discretion of the Court.<sup>58</sup> The power of a constitutional court to advise is not unusual, but holding that advice to be binding on all lower courts certainly is.

Advisory opinions are dangerous, in that they mimic, but do not reproduce, fair procedure in the conduct of hearings. Although required to be pronounced in open court,  $\frac{59}{2}$  they are based solely on one set of facts (the actual reference) outlined by the President. The Court is bound to accept this reference, and cannot question it, providing an inevitable bias to the Union government.<sup>60</sup> The Court is also not required to issue notice and hear all affected parties. More dangerously, unlike adjudicatory decisions, advisory opinions are open neither to appeal nor review. These procedural infirmities should imply that advisory opinions should, at the very least, not be binding as law. This is unfortunately not the case; the Court also performs, in advisory opinions, the function of reconsidering its own judgments—a practice that it has dubbed as 'interpreting', despite the fact that this effectively allows the executive to seek review against a decision where none should legally lie.<sup>61</sup>

Justice Zafrulla Khan's warning of the dangers of advisory opinions merits reconsideration. The permission to the executive to seek this manner of review on judgments that it finds politically inconvenient should not to be allowed,  $62$  particularly when it is the executive government that defines the reference and accordingly limits the scope of the opinion itself.

## **2. Adjudicating Federal Disputes**

Article 131 of the Constitution vests the Supreme Court with original jurisdiction to hear suits between a State, or States and the Union, or between States *inter se*. <sup>63</sup> Although the Constitution also provides for an executive body—the 'inter-state council'<sup>64</sup>—to promote cooperation between States, the Constituent Assembly did not seriously contest the notion that the Supreme Court (and not the executive) ought to be the arbiter in federal disputes between constituent units.<sup>65</sup> The Supreme Court has affirmed this understanding, and Bhagwati J goes so far as to argue that this jurisdiction to resolve federal disputes is a 'necessary concomitant of a federal or a quasi-federal form of government'. 66 The Supreme Court's jurisdiction under Article 131 is narrow in three ways—by limitations on the nature of the suits; by restrictions on the types of parties to the suits; and by constitutionally specified exclusions.

Restrictions on the nature of the suit usually relate to the exclusion of political disputes in adjudication by the Supreme Court.<sup>67</sup> This doctrine of 'political questions' has been treated with caution;<sup>68</sup> although the Court affirms in theory that 'Mere wrangles between governments have no place under the scheme of the article',  $\frac{69}{9}$  the Supreme Court chooses in practice to apply Seervai's nuanced understanding of it. Seervai notes on this doctrine that 'The judicial process involves the ascertainment of relevant facts, and the application of the law, or the Constitution, to the facts so ascertained. In this sense, there is nothing outside the judicial process.<sup> $20$ </sup> In accordance with this, the Supreme Court, when it does entertain disputes that are likely to be political, clarifies that it confines itself, per the language of Article 131, to the 'legal right' at stake.

When it comes to restrictions on the parties before the Court, litigation has focused on a common claim that the Union is able to make because of a drafting anomaly in Article 131. Article 131 makes reference to the 'Government of India' but also the 'State' and not, correspondingly, the 'State Government'.<sup>71</sup> The Union, therefore, commonly took the claim that action taken by it is against the transient State Government and not the State, and therefore lies outside Article  $131<sup>22</sup>$  The Supreme Court held eventually that the individual State Governments, acting through their ministers, could be said to act for the States themselves.<sup>73</sup> Seervai supports this as the most pragmatic reading, pointing to the history of Article 131 in support of his claim that this was an inadvertent drafting error.<sup>74</sup> Even when reading 'State' to include 'State Government', the Court has since held that suits by a single Government official (even if authorised by the State) are not maintainable under Article  $131<sup>75</sup>$  nor are suits by agents of the State, even if statutorily appointed. $\frac{76}{6}$ 

The third and final limitation to the Supreme Court's jurisdiction under Article 131 is a constitutionally embedded restraint: Article 262, which creates a separate mechanism for the resolution of disputes relating to inter-State rivers.<sup>77</sup> Parliament, using powers under Article 262, enacted the Inter-state River Water Disputes Act 1956 (IWDA), which excluded entirely the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court from 'water disputes'.<sup>78</sup> Applying this very categorical bar, the Supreme Court has ruled that its jurisdiction under Article 131 will extend only to the enforcement of an award by a tribunal under the Act, $\frac{79}{2}$  or to any dispute that does not fall within the IWDA's definition of 'water dispute'.<sup>80</sup>

#### **3. The Jurisdiction to Interpret the Constitution**

Dr Ambedkar's constitutional project of uniformity in the Indian legal structure was further advanced by the inclusion of Article 132 in the draft constitution, which allows appeals to the Supreme Court on cases involving 'a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of this Constitution'.<sup>81</sup> Additionally, under Article 13, the Court can declare any law invalid if it is inconsistent with the fundamental rights enumerated in **Part III** of the Constitution. <sup>82</sup> As this judicial review inevitably involves some measure of constitutional interpretation, the Court may consider a question of interpretation of the Constitution directly, if it concerns fundamental rights, and otherwise, on appeal under Article 132. I shall not address the question of *how* the Supreme Court has interpreted the Constitution; rather, I shall touch upon two key jurisdictional issues; that of the rationale behind the inclusion of this appellate provision, and of the restrictions upon its jurisdiction in such appeals.

During the debates around draft Article 110 (now Article 132), the Constituent Assembly was concerned primarily with whether separate appeals for questions of constitutional interpretation were necessary.<sup>83</sup> Article 132 was, however, retained, and the justification drawn by Dr Ambedkar was wholly technical. He intended, Dr Ambedkar said, to introduce a provision that would require all cases concerning constitutional interpretation to be heard by a bench of a minimum of five judges, <sup>84</sup> by introducing an amendment that later became the current Article 145(3). It was apparent that the intention was to ensure that constitutional questions were not only heard, but authoritatively considered by a majority of the Court, which was already understood to be sitting in benches, and not *en banc*. The exclusivity of jurisdiction to interpret the Constitution traces back to this sole
requirement—that there shall not be differing and competing interpretations of constitutional provisions, and that the Supreme Court while pronouncing the law that binds all courts should remain consistent. Later research has demonstrated, however, that this is not the practice, and there remains some reluctance to refer cases concerning constitutional interpretation to five-judge benches.<sup>85</sup>

In addition to some reluctance to actually hear constitutional questions as a bench of five judges, the Supreme Court neglects Dr Ambedkar's unifying project by introducing limitations on its interpretive jurisdiction where none ought to exist. In an early decision, Subba Rao J noted that the principle that guides Article 132 is that the 'final authority of interpreting the Constitution must rest with the Supreme Court'.<sup>86</sup> It stands to reason, therefore, that the Court must have wide powers in interpreting the Constitution, and Article 132 was so designed to include all proceedings, civil, criminal, and otherwise.

The Supreme Court has nevertheless refused to hear appeals from the judgments of single judges in High Courts in India, on the grounds that there may lie an intra-court appeal to a larger High Court bench before it comes to them. Civil appeals from decisions of single judges in High Courts, it must be admitted, are specifically prohibited.<sup>87</sup> However, such appeals in constitutional questions are not prohibited, at all. Despite this, the Court early on dismissed the claim that appeals on matters of constitutional interpretation could not lie from decisions given by single judges in High Courts.<sup>88</sup> It has subsequently backtracked, holding that although this approach is 'technically correct', it should be avoided; but it has not given any reasons for either the initial holding, or the reading of 'technical' impropriety.<sup>89</sup>

## **4. Constitutional Court: Some Concluding Remarks**

The Supreme Court, as a constitutional court, therefore has evolved unevenly. As an arbiter of disputes between States inter se and the Union, it plays an increasingly diminishing role, choosing to interpret restrictions on its own jurisdiction strictly. As an advisor, in contrast, it reads its powers widely, according to itself the power to effectively review its own judgments without following the procedures that it otherwise safeguards adamantly. As an interpreter, it subverts the reason it was appointed, in choosing to narrow appeals concerning constitutional interpretation and to introduce limits that the Constitution itself does not provide. Dr Ambedkar's project of uniformity is not, therefore, borne out by the Supreme Court when it functions as a constitutional court. In any case, one may say, broadly, that the Court chooses to privilege appellate and advisory functions over discharging its constitutional functions.

## **IV. THE FINAL COURT**

The Supreme Court of India is a final court. Its judgments are binding on all courts below;  $\frac{90}{2}$  and all civil and judicial authorities are directed to act in compliance with its orders.<sup>91</sup> As a court of record, its judgments are to stand unalterable (except by the constitutional process of review) and it has the power to punish for non-compliance or disrespect of its orders, *suo motu*. <sup>92</sup> However, the Court also has wide powers to 'do complete justice' in each case, and the frequent exercise of these powers

sometimes disturbs the finality of its judgments. This is most clear when we see the court-evolved remedy of 'curative petitions'—effectively, a means of obtaining a second review after a first application for review is denied.

The Court justifies the wide use of its powers to 'do complete justice', as well as the creation of its 'curative' jurisdiction, on claims of an *inherent* power to do justice. Yet, the practice of the Court now shows that while the finality of judgments is still difficult to disturb, simultaneously, compliance with the Court's judgments is reducing, perhaps in response to the wide and creative use of its powers to 'do complete justice'. In this section, I take as my theme the consequences of Supreme Court judgments, and examine them from two perspectives. First, I examine the *finality* of these judgments, looking at the Court's powers of review. Secondly, I look at the powers of the Court to enforce judgments, examining its ability to 'do complete justice' and punish for contempt. Finally, tying these two together, I examine the claim of the Court to powers that are *inherent*, and not directly drawn from the Constitution.

# **1. The Finality of Judgments—Correcting Errors: The Power to Review, and Curative Petitions**

The Constituent Assembly may not have envisioned the Court's current diffused structure, but it did, however, contemplate a situation where the Court might fall into error, and have to correct itself. For this, the Supreme Court has been granted the power to review its own judgments, under certain limited circumstances. Article 127 of the Constitution permits reviews of Supreme Court judgments, and has both substantive and procedural limitations. Substantively, reviews are allowed on three grounds: when new and important evidence is discovered, when there is a mistake or an error that is 'apparent on the face of the record', and for 'any other sufficient reason'. $\frac{93}{7}$  Procedurally, reviews have to be filed within thirty days of the judgment that is sought to be reviewed. <sup>94</sup> They must be heard by the same judges that originally passed the judgment sought to be reviewed (as far as possible) and oral arguments are not necessary—the Court may consider the review through 'circulation'—that is, the bench will discuss and decide whether to issue notice (ie, hear) the review, or to dismiss it.  $\frac{95}{2}$  The requirements of review, accordingly, are stringent, and have been stringently applied in review petitions. The Supreme Court is reluctant to grant review, holding categorically that it does *not* fall within the 'inherent powers' of the court,  $\frac{96}{9}$  and is a 'creature of statute' (presumably referring also to the Constitution). $\frac{97}{2}$ 

Despite this stringent application, the Supreme Court has now judicially created the remedy of a 'curative petition', or a 'second review petition'. In *Rupa Ashok Hurra v Ashok Hurra*, 98 the Court, relying on its powers to do complete justice under Article 142 (discussed below) allowed the petitioners to seek a second review (by filing a 'curative petition') to correct the orders of the Court. Although Article 127 of the Constitution only allows the Court to review its orders under limited and specific circumstances, the Court held that a second review was permissible if three requirements were met: <u>99</u>

[W]e think that a petitioner is entitled to relief *ex debito justitiae* if he establishes (1) violation of the principles of natural justice in that he was not a party to the lis but the judgment adversely affected his interests or, if he was a party to the lis, he was not served with notice of the proceedings and the matter proceeded as if he had notice, and (2) where in the proceedings a learned Judge failed to disclose his connection with the subject-matter or the parties giving scope for an apprehension of bias and the judgment adversely affects the petitioner.<sup>100</sup>

The claim in *Rupa Hurra* is that power to judicially evolve remedies that are neither in the Constitution nor in statute is *inherent* in the Court. The Court, as later discussed, has the power to 'do complete justice'; this, in turn, allows it, presumably, to traverse restrictions on reviews and allow a second one, where one has been denied. The Supreme Court has now held that it will interpret the self-created conditions governing curative petitions, in turn, as strictly as reviews.<sup>101</sup> The consequence is an anomalous situation, where the Court is unwilling to permit review except in strict compliance with constitutional requirements, but willing to accept a remedy that subverts the entire basis of review and finality of its judgments.

Criticism of review petitions, however, has been limited;  $\frac{102}{102}$  the notion that the Court may itself override constitutional provisions to create additional remedies is not seriously challenged. Indeed, following the judgment in *Rupa Hurra*, the Supreme Court Handbook recognises the remedy and outlines the process of hearing a curative petition.  $\frac{103}{103}$  While the introduction of curative petitions has ended the practice of litigants attempting to challenge Supreme Court rulings by claiming violations of fundamental rights by the Court,  $\frac{104}{10}$  it has created yet another avenue for challenging the finality of its own decisions. This avenue remains improperly defined and tested, most of all because it follows neither of the procedures that could have introduced it—constitutional amendments, or introduction into the Supreme Court's Rules.<sup>105</sup> Since *Rupa Hurra*, a curative petition has been successful only once.<sup>106</sup> It does, however, even in theory if not in practice, challenge the notions that there is in fact a substantial degree of finality that attaches to the Supreme Court's judgments.

### **2. Enforcing Justice**

### a. *The Power to do 'Complete Justice'*

Article 142 of the Constitution allows the Supreme Court in exercise of its jurisdiction to 'pass such decree or make such order as is necessary for doing complete justice in any cause or matter pending before it'. The Supreme Court has used these powers widely, largely in connection with the enforcement of fundamental rights, but also in appeals and other remedies. With the power to do 'complete justice' $\frac{107}{102}$  in each case, the Supreme Court has used its powers to frame guidelines to control executive action; <sup>108</sup> it has asked legislatures to frame appropriate laws where it finds lacunae that affect fundamental rights,  $\frac{109}{2}$  constituted special investigative teams and directed investigations to arrive at findings of fact,  $\frac{110}{10}$  cancelled mining leases  $\frac{111}{10}$  and telecom licences  $\frac{112}{10}$  granted by the government, and granted interim bail in criminal matters,  $\frac{113}{113}$  amongst other measures.

In exercising this wide power of relief, the Supreme Court has held that it cannot pass orders that contravene fundamental rights.<sup>114</sup> It has, however, had an uneasy relationship with statutory law and exercising its powers under this provision. In early cases, such as *Arjun Khiamal Makhijani v* Jamnadas Tuliani, <sup>115</sup> the Court held that it would not grant relief in derogation of statutory provisions. In subsequent cases, however, the position has reversed, with the Court declaring that there is no restriction that statutory law could place, it held, on its power to issue directions under

Article 142;<sup>116</sup> 'Any prohibition or restriction contained in ordinary laws cannot act as a limitation on the constitutional power of this Court.<sup>'117</sup> This rather categorical defiance of the law is now tempered by the notion that the Court, despite being (apparently) not bound by statute, would nonetheless have to 'take into consideration the statutory provisions regulating the matter in dispute'. <sup>118</sup> In recent times, the Supreme Court has returned to the position that it cannot 'ignore the substantive rights of litigants' while passing orders under Article 142, as indeed, it ought not.<sup>119</sup>

When read with the power to enforce fundamental rights, the Court has used powers under Article 142 to pass directions to 'fill the gaps' in existing laws, until the legislature steps in to address the same.<sup>120</sup> In recent times this has led to resistance from State authorities, who have delayed, and in some cases, outright refused, to comply with such orders, charging the Supreme Court with overstepping its bounds.<sup>121</sup> There has been a rise in pleas to address legislative deficits under Article 142, but this has now left the Court more reluctant to exercise its powers in this manner.<sup>122</sup>

It is notable that a power so widely used by the Supreme Court today merited barely any discussion during the Constituent Assembly debates. $\frac{123}{123}$  As with the provisions allowing appeals by special leave, Article 142 lacks internal or jurisprudentially evolved guidelines, leading to what one commentator calls a 'wavering approach' in its application.<sup>124</sup>

## b. *The Power to Punish for Contempt of Court*

The broad nature of orders that the Supreme Court can pass in exercise of this inherent jurisdiction to 'do justice' can lead to circumstances where the executive refrains from complying. In these circumstances, the Supreme Court, as a court of record, can exercise its 'inherent' powers to punish for contempt.<sup>125</sup> The power to punish for contempt is specifically provided, with the caveat that Parliament may legislate on how it is to be investigated and punished.<sup>126</sup>

As with the powers under Article 142, the Supreme Court has routinely described its powers to punish for contempt as being in exercise of its 'inherent' jurisdiction.<sup>127</sup> This draws from the common-law doctrine that courts that record their orders are enabled to punish persons for not complying with them.<sup>128</sup> However, as Dr Ambedkar observed in the Constituent Assembly, the Supreme Court is a creature of the Constitution, and powers to punish for contempt are provided for, specifically because they are *not*, in fact, inherent.<sup>129</sup> The Supreme Court evidently does not agree; this has resulted in an almost constant tussle between the bar, the bench, and the legislature,  $\frac{130}{2}$ particularly when it comes to the Supreme Court enforcing contempt provisions against lawyers.<sup>131</sup>

Criticism of the Supreme Court's power to punish for contempt, however, has not arisen from its use of what is now described as 'civil contempt', or the power to enforce its orders.<sup>132</sup> Rather it has come from the Court's use of its powers to punish for 'criminal contempt', which is statutorily defined as publishing, speaking, or otherwise doing any act which 'scandalises or tends to scandalise, or lowers or tends to lower the authority of any court', or which tends to prejudice, interfere with or obstruct any judicial proceedings. $\frac{133}{13}$  The Supreme Court appears to be easily scandalised—it has sentenced persons to jail for protesting its judgments outside the Court, <sup>134</sup> for criticising specific judges (holding that this may amount to the civil wrong of libel but punishing it as criminal contempt)<sup>135</sup> and pulling up newspaper editors and publishers for publishing what it does not deem to

be 'fair criticism'.<sup>136</sup> The term 'scandalising the court' is notoriously nebulous and hard to define, so much so that there have been repeated calls $\frac{137}{2}$  to narrow or remove entirely the power to punish for criminal contempt. Most recently, however, the Supreme Court has reaffirmed that this power is not only advisable, but 'necessary' to the administration of justice.<sup>138</sup> The term 'scandalising the court', borrowed from common law in England, has undergone substantial scrutiny by the UK Law Commission.<sup>139</sup> A parallel effort is required in India if we are to ensure that powers to punish for contempt are used to enforce compliance with the court's orders, and not to punish criticism of it. $\frac{140}{140}$ 

## **3. The Supreme Court's Claim to Inherent Powers**

The Supreme Court, as we have seen, allows reviews of its own judgments outside the constitutional framework with some degree of ease—through advisory opinions, through the new remedy of curative petitions, and so on. It also exercises powers to address legislative 'gaps', frame guidelines and grant all kinds of relief to litigants; again, this is justified as an exercise of powers that *inhere* in the Court.

This ease can be attributed to two factors. First, as we have seen, although judgments of the Supreme Court bind all courts, they do not bind the Supreme Court itself. The Court is free to revisit its own judgments, although it has held that the operative factor is the bench strength—benches of smaller sizes may not overrule larger benches. Secondly, the Court draws from what it describes as its 'inherent power' to grant relief *ex debito justitiae*. With the introduction of the Constitution and specific delimitations on its jurisdiction, should the Supreme Court exercise 'inherent powers' to contravene them? $\frac{141}{12}$  The Supreme Court today reveals that it can, and will do so, in several circumstances: when granting curative petitions, when punishing for contempt, when exercising its powers to do complete justice, and when expanding its appellate jurisdiction in appeals for special leave.

The argument that the Supreme Court could exercise powers *ex debito justitiae* (for the purpose of justice) was formally accepted in *Abdul Rehman Antulay v RS Nayak*. <sup>142</sup> Mukharji J held 143 that the Court could exercise powers of review regardless of the nature of the proceeding—'It can do so in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction in any proceeding pending before it before insisting on the formalities of a review application.<sup>'</sup> $\frac{144}{10}$  The source of this power, according to Mukharji J, was twofold: first, the strength of the bench: a larger bench, he noted, could overrule a smaller bench regardless of the nature of proceeding. <sup>145</sup> Secondly, Mukharji J noted that the Supreme Court was not only empowered, but also obliged to ensure that no person suffered as a consequence of its error; this power could be exercised *ex debito justitiae* (by reason or obligation of justice). 146

The Court, then, uses the argument that it has 'inherent powers' to 'do justice' (which is how it interprets '*ex debito justitiae*') in permitting acts that are otherwise in contravention of statutory and constitutional requirements. This, in turn, permits them to dispense with constitutional safeguards, such as those limiting the power to review, as 'formalities'. As with appellate provisions, this easy dispensation of constitutional limits on its power results in a remarkable widening of the Court's jurisdiction. The implication, additionally, is that the Court appears to view itself as an entity that can supersede the Constitution, instead of one that is created by it for the purpose of safeguarding constitutional rights and unifying constitutional interpretation.

#### **V. CONCLUSION**

The Supreme Court today is an institution struggling to manage the width of its own jurisdiction. Overwhelming arrears confirm the Constituent Assembly's fears of 'flooding' the Court. In 1978, Rajeev Dhavan, after an exhaustive analysis of the Court's docket from Independence until then, noted, 'the Supreme Court is unable to discharge its extremely wide jurisdiction. It simply cannot do so.'<sup>147</sup> More than arrears, the inconsistencies that arise in decisions by disparate benches of two judges have led to conflicts in constitutional interpretation. This contravenes not only the Constitution's mandate in Articles 132 and 145, but also the unifying principle that underlay the Constituent Assembly's provisions for the Supreme Court. In addition to arrears and inconsistency, the Court now faces persistent non-compliance with its orders, particularly those concerning the power to do 'complete justice' under Article 142. The consequence, as the Supreme Court saw in the recent case of *Sahara*, is that it is forced to take recourse to powers of contempt to enforce compliance despite repeated flouting of its directions.<sup>148</sup>

Responses to the rapid increase in the Supreme Court's burden have focused on institutional restructuring. The Law Commission of India, for instance, has recommended, variously, the creation of a 'constitutional' bench to hear important matters $\frac{149}{12}$  or that the Supreme Court establish four divisions ('cassation courts') in different parts of the country to hear appellate matters<sup>150</sup> and increasing the number of judges further.<sup>151</sup> The pendency of cases is seen largely as a technical matter, and little or no attention has been paid to the constitutional basis of this pendency, or to recommendations for altering the jurisdiction of the Court itself.<sup>152</sup>

The Supreme Court's jurisdiction may well be wider 'than any superior court in any part of the world'. However, when exercised outside constitutional prohibitions that constrain it, it results in non-compliance, inconsistency, and erosion of the Supreme Court's authority. The Supreme Court is a creature of the Constitution; it draws its power from constitutional sources and not, as Dhavan once described it, as an 'abstract inherent jurisdiction'.<sup>153</sup> The root of its powers must draw from constitutional principles. At the same time, this impetus for self-correction must come from within the Court—it has been granted the latitude to evolve principles to guide the exercise of its jurisdiction. The evolution of such principles, it is hoped, will address not only structural difficulties of arrears, but also, over time, the deeper institutional problems of inconsistency and non-compliance.

<sup>1</sup> *Constituent Assembly Debates*, vol 7 (Lok Sabha Secretariat 1986) 37, 4 November 1948.

 $2$  Alladi Krishnaswamy Ayyar, a member of the Drafting Committee of the Constituent Assembly, was a lawyer himself.

 $3$  This chapter does not address questions of jurisdiction of other constitutional courts and adjudicatory bodies, such as State High Courts, dealt with under Articles 225, 226 *et seq* of the Constitution, or the administrative tribunals constituted under Part XIV-A of the Constitution.

 $\frac{4}{3}$  See eg, Burt Neuborne, 'The Supreme Court of India, a Constitutional Court Profile' (2003) 1(3) International Journal of Constitutional Law 1; Lavanya Rajamani and Arghya Sengupta, 'The Supreme Court of India: Power, Promise, and Overreach' in Niraja GopalJayal and Pratap Bhanu Mehta (eds) *The Oxford Companion to Politics in India* (Oxford University Press 2010).

<sup>&</sup>lt;sup>5</sup> For a contemporary quantitative analysis of the Supreme Court's docket from 1993 to 2011, see Nick Robinson, 'A Quantitative Analysis of the Indian Supreme Court's Workload' (2013) 10(3) Journal of Empirical Legal Studies 570, and for the first three decades since Independence (1950–80), see Rajeev Dhavan, *The Supreme Court under Strain: The Challenge of Arrears* (NM Tripathi 1978).

<sup>6</sup> See eg, *Constituent Assembly Debates*, vol 8 (Lok Sabha Secretariat 1986) 620, 6 June 1949 (Shibban Lal Saksena). See also *Constituent Assembly Debates*, vol 8 (Lok Sabha Secretariat 1986) 841, 850, 14 June 1949 (Thakur Dass Bhargava, Bakshi Tek Chand).