# Modigliani, Franco

An Italian-born economist who fled the fascist regime of Benito Mussolini at the outbreak of WWII, Modigliani pursued the study of economics at the New School of Social Research (renamed New School University) in New York where he received his doctorate in 1944. He taught at several universities but, from 1962 on, he stayed at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. His famous dissertation on the Keynesian system served as a springboard for many of his lifetime contributions, which include stabilization policies, the FRB-MIT-Penn-SSRC Model (MPS), the Modigliani-Miller (M&M) theorem (Modigliani-Miller Theorem) and the life cycle hypothesis (LCH). Modigliani was awarded the Nobel Memorial Prize in economics in 1985 for research in the latter two areas.

Modigliani contributed to making the disciplines of financial economics and macroeconomics operational, and thus more quantitative from a neoclassical perspective. The influence of his teachers, particularly J. Marschak and A. Wald, is seen in his quantitative MPS model based on Keynesian economic thought and his M&M hypothesis in financial economics. The macroeconomic framework that Modigliani built emphasized the savings, consumption, investment, and liquidity components of the Keynesian model. He explained the anomalous fluctuations of the savings (S) to income (Y) ratio during the 1940s and 1950s. He explained the  $S/Y$  ratio by the relative position in the income distribution of individuals, and by secular and cyclical changes in income ([3], Vol. 2). The secular changes represent differences in real income per capita above the highest level reached in any preceding year, signifying his contribution to the relative income hypothesis in consumption theory. The cyclical changes represent variation in money income measured by an index,  $(Y_t - Y_t^0)/Y_t$ , where  $Y_t$  is real income per capita in current time, and  $Y_t^0$  is the past peak level of such income. He estimated that the secular and the cyclical affects on income were approximately  $0.1\%$  and  $0.125\%$ , respectively. These coefficients translate to an  $S/Y$ ratio of about 11.7%. Klein and Ozmucur [1] revisited Modigliani's  $S/Y$  specification with a much larger sample size and were able to reaffirm the robustness of the model.

In 1954, Modigliani laid the groundwork for the now-famous life cycle hypothesis (LCH) ([5], Vol. 6, pp. 3-45). The LCH bracketed broader macroeconomic problems such as why  $S/Y$  is larger in rich countries than in poor countries; why  $S$ is greater for farm families than urban families: why lower status urban families save less than other urban families; why when a higher future income is expected, more of current income will be consumed now; why in countries with rising income that is expected to continue to increase,  $S/Y$  will be smaller; and why property income that mostly accrues to the rich is largely saved, whereas wages that are mostly earned by the poor are largely spent. To answer these questions, the LCH model maintains the relative income concept of the early  $S/Y$  model. The income concept is, however, more encompassing in being high or low relative to the individual's lifetime or permanent income, marking Modigliani's contribution to the permanent income hypothesis in consumption theory. The LCH captures how individuals save when they are young, spend when they are old, and make bequests to their children. In that scenario, consumption,  $C$  is uniform over time, T, or  $C(T) = (N/L)\overline{Y}$ , where L is the number of years the representative individual lives;  $N < L$  is the number of years the individual earns labor income, and  $\overline{Y}$  is average income. Average income is represented by a flat line,  $Y(T)$  up to  $N$ , which falls to zero after  $N$ , when the individual retires. Since income is earned for  $N$  periods, lifetime income is  $NY$ , and savings is defined as the excess of  $Y(T)$  over  $C(T)$ .

The empirical estimate of the LCH included a wealth-effect variable on consumption. Saving during an individual's early working life is one way in which wealth accumulates. Such an accumulation of wealth reaches a peak during the person's working age when income is highest. Individuals also inherit wealth. If the initial stock of wealth is  $A_0$ , then, at a certain age,  $\tau$ , a person's consumption can be expressed as  $(L - \tau)C = A + (N - \tau)Y$ . Thus, we have a model of consumption explained by income and wealth or assets that can be confronted with data. An early estimate of the coefficient of this LCH model yielded  $C = 0.76Y + 0.073A$ (Modigliani, ibid., 70). The result reconciled an early controversy that the short-run propensity to consume from income was between  $70\%$  and  $80\%$ , and the long-run propensity was approximately 100%. The reconciliation occurs because the short-run marginal propensity to consume (MPC) is 0.766, and assuming assets, *A*, is approximately five times income, while labor income is approximately 80% of income, then a long-run MPC is approximately 0*.*98 = 0*.*8*(.*76*Y )* + 5*(.*073*Y )*.

Modigliani's largest quantitative effort was the MPS model. Working with the board of governors of the Federal Reserve Banks (FRB) and the Social Science Research Council (SSRC), Modigliani built the MIT–Penn–SSRC (MPS) econometric model in the 1960s. The 1968 version, which had 171 endogenous and 119 exogenous variables, predicted poorly in the 1970s and 1980s. In 1996, the FRB/US model replaced the MPS by incorporating rational and vector autoregression types of expectations with a view to improve forecasts. The financial sector was the dominant module in the MPS model. The net worth of consumers took the form of the real value of money and debt. The demand for money depended on the nominal interest rate and the current value of output. Unborrowed reserves influenced the short-term money rate of interest and the nominal money supply, and through the term structure effect, the short-term rate affected the longterm rate and hence savings, which is essential for the expansion of output and employment. Out of this process came the following two fitted demand and supply equations that characterized the financial sector:

$$M_d = -0.0021iY - 0.0043r_sY + 0.542Y$$
$$+ 0.0046NP + 0.833Md_{t-1} \tag{1}$$

$$FR = (0.001 - 0.00204S_{2} - 0.00237S_{3} - 0.00223S_{4})\overline{D}_{t-1} + 0.00122i\overline{D}_{t-1} + 0.00144d\ d\overline{D}_{t-1} + 0.646(1 - \delta)\Delta RU - 0.502\delta\Delta CL + 0.394RD + 0.705FR_{t-1}$$
(2)

where *Md* is demand for deposits held by the public, *Y* is gross national product (GNP), *rs* is the savings deposit rate, *i* is the available return on short-term assets, *P* is expected profits, *F R* is free reserves, *Si* are seasonal adjustments, *D* is the expected value of the stock of member banks deposits, *RU* is unborrowed reserves, *CL* is commercial loans, *RL* is a reserve release term, and *δ* is a constant. The equations indicate that the cause and effect between unborrowed reserves to GNP works through lags, causing delay responses to policy measures.

Another of Modigliani's noteworthy contributions to quantitative analysis is the Modigliani and Miller (M&M) theorem [6], which has created a revolution in corporate finance equivalent to the revolution in portfolio theory by H. Markowitz and W. Sharpe. The M&M hypothesis stands on two major propositions, namely that "*...* market value of any firm is independent of its capital structure and is given by capitalizing its expected return at the rate *ρk* appropriate to its class," and that "*the average cost of capital to any firm is completely independent of the capital structure and is equal to the capitalization rate of a pure equity stream of its class*" (Italics original) ([4], Vol. 3, 10–11). The M&M model can be demonstrated for a firm with no growth, no new net investment, and no taxes. The firm belongs to a risk group in which its shares can be substituted for one another.

The value of the firm can be written as *Vj* ≡ *Sj* + *Dj* = *Xj ρj* , where *Xj* measures expected return on assets, *ρj* measures interest rate for a given risk class, *Dj* is market value of bonds, and *Sj* is the market value of stocks. For instance, if the earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT) are \$5000 and if the low-risk interest is 10%, then the net operating income is \$50 000.

The proposition of the M&M hypothesis is often expressed as an invariance principle based on the idea that the value of a firm is independent of how it is financed. The proof of this invariance is based on arbitrage. As stated by Modigliani, "*...* an investor can buy and sell stocks and bonds in such a way as to exchange one income stream for another *...* the value of the overpriced shares will fall and that of the under priced shares will rise, thereby tending to eliminate the discrepancy between the market values of the firms" (ibid., p. 11). For example, an investor can get a 6% return either by holding the stocks of an unlevered firm (0*.*06*X*1), or holding the stocks and debts of a levered firm, that is, [0*.*06*(X*<sup>2</sup> − *rD*2) of stocks + 0*.*06*rD*<sup>2</sup> of debts], where the subscripts refer to firms, *X* is stock, *D* is debt, and *r* is return.

The M&M hypothesis was a springboard for many new works in finance. A first extension of the model by the authors reflected the effect of corporate tax effects. Further analysis incorporating the effects of personal and corporate income taxes does not change the value of the firm because both personal and corporate tax rates tend to cancel out. Researchers dealt with questions that arise when the concept of risk class used in the computation of a firm's value is replaced with perfect market assumptions, and when mean–variance models are used instead of arbitrage. The value of the firm was also found to be independent of dividend policy. By changing the discount rate for the purpose of calculating a firm's present value, it was found that bankruptcy can have an effect on the value of a firm. Macroeconomic variables such as the inflation rate can result in the underestimation of the value of a firm's equity. The M&M theorem has been extended into many areas of modern research. It supports the popular Black–Scholes capital structure model. It has been used to validate the effect of the Tax Reform Act of 1986 on values of the firm. Modern capital asset pricing model (CAPM) scholars such as Sharpe (**Sharpe, William F.**), J. Lintner, and J. Treynor [2] were influenced by the M&M result in the construction of their financial models and ratios.

On a personal level, Modigliani was an outstandingly enthusiastic, passionate, relentless, and focusdriven teacher and exceptional researcher whose arena was both economic theory and the real empirical world.

## **References**

[1] Klein, L.R. & Ozmucur, S. (2005). *The Wealth Effect: A Contemporary Update*, paper presented at the New School University.

- [2] Mehrling, P. (2005). *Fisher Black and the Revolutionary Idea of Finance*, John Wiley & Sons, Inc, Hoboken.
- [3] Modigliani, F. (1980). Fluctuations in the saving-income ratio: a problem in economic forecasting, in *The Collected Papers of Franco Modigliani, The Life Cycle Hypothesis of Savings*, A. Abel, & S. Johnson, eds, The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, Vol. 2.
- [4] Modigliani, F. (1980). The cost of capital, corporate finance and the theory of investment, in *The Collected Papers of Franco Modigliani, The Theory of Finance and Other Essays*, A. Abel, ed., The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, Vol.3.
- [5] Modigliani, F. (2005). *Collected Papers of Franco Modigliani*, F. Modigliani, ed., The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, Vol. 6.
- [6] Modigliani, F. & Miller, M. (1958). The cost of capital, corporation finance and the theory of investment, *American Economic Review* **48**(3), 261–297.

## **Further Reading**

- Modigliani, F. (2003). The Keynesian Gospel according to Modigliani, *The American Economist* **47**(1), 3–24.
- Ramrattan, L. & Szenberg, M. (2004). Franco Modigliani 1918–2003, in memoriam, *The American Economist* **43**(1), 3–8.
- Szenberg, M. & Ramrattan, L. (2008). *Franco Modigliani, A Mind That Never Rests with a Foreword by Robert M. Solow*, Palgrave Macmillan, Houndmills, Basingstoke and New York.

## **Related Articles**

#### **Modigliani–Miller Theorem**.

MICHAEL SZENBERG & LALL RAMRATTAN