# **12 Scientific temper**

# Arguments for an Indian Enlightenment

Meera Nanda

Let the spirit of inquiry overwhelm the respect for traditions ...

M. N. Roy

#### Science and secularization

The modernist authors of the Constitution imagined a democratic and secular India as a spacious building with many rooms that stood on two sturdy pillars: religious tolerance, combined with a spirit of skepticism – or what they liked to call 'scientific temper' – regarding all hand-me-down traditions and dogmas.

The words 'scientific temper', just like its twin 'secularism', are not mentioned anywhere in the original draft of the Constitution. It is only the 42nd Amendment, passed under the Emergency rule imposed by Indira Gandhi, that made it a duty of citizens 'to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and reform' (Article 51A, h).

And yet, this chapter will argue, cultivation of a scientific temper was one of the cardinal principles that animated the secular-humanists<sup>1</sup> among the architects of modern India. This group of thinkers considered modern science invaluable not just for its contribution to industrial development, but also for its potential to bring about a cultural revolution in the country. They understood that the hierarchies of caste and gender that pervaded Indian culture presupposed specific metaphysical beliefs about the natural order which, in fact, had been factually disproved by modern science. The  $\text{secular-humanists}$  believed – and hoped – that scientific demystification of fundamental beliefs about the natural order would lead to a genuine change in the normative order of Indian society, or in simpler words, change in mind would lead to a change of heart.

The objective of this chapter is to place the secular-humanists in the context of the three political-intellectual traditions that dominated mid-20th century India; namely, Gandhism, socialism and dalit-liberation. The resonances and conflicts between these traditions are examined while we try to answer such questions as: Who were the secularhumanists? What aspects of India's dominant culture were they rebelling against? What did they really mean when they exhorted Indians to cultivate a 'scientific temper'?

#### Indian Enlightenment: radical and moderate wings

The Indian advocates of a scientific temper were part of the worldwide spread of the spirit of the Enlightenment. Like the European Enlightenment, the Indian Enlightenment, too, had a radical and a moderate wing.

#### 176 Meera Nanda

'The Enlightenment' refers to the intellectual-cum-socio-political movement of protest against the exercise of all arbitrary authority that started in 18th century Europe in the wake of the Scientific Revolution. Emboldened by the success of the empirical methodology of modern science which had overturned the medieval worldview backed by centuries of scholastic learning, the 'enlighteners' sought to re-evaluate all inherited justifications for social hierarchies, regardless of whether these justifications came from the edicts of kings backed by priestly rituals and holy books, or whether hierarchies were self-enforced by men and women through the force of custom, socialization and habit (Kors 2003).

There were moderate and radical camps in the European Enlightenment. The moderate Enlightenment was the kind favored by the mainstream, the governments and even the Churches themselves in countries like Britain, Germany, the Netherlands. Spain and the United States as they modernized. This moderate Enlightenment, in the words of Ionathan Israel

aspired to conquer ignorance and superstition, establish toleration and revolutionize ideas, education and attitudes ... but in such a way as to preserve and safeguard what were judged essential elements of the older structure, effecting a viable synthesis of old and new, and of reason and faith (2001: 11).

The radical Enlightenment, on the other hand:

whether on atheistic or deistic basis, rejected all compromise with the past and sought to sweep away existing structures entirely, rejecting the Creation as understood in the Judeao-Christian civilization ... and refusing to accept that there is any God-ordained social hierarchy, concentration of privilege or land-ownership in noble hands, or religious sanction for monarchy (2001:  $11-12$ ).

If the preservation of the Judeo-Christian worldview was what divided the radicals from the moderates in Europe, it was the worldview that legitimized caste that distinguished the moderates from the radicals in India. The moderates, by and large, were content to merely 'cleanse Hinduism of impurities, to chop off the diseased branches of the tree of Brahminical tradition', by fighting against untouchability, while the radicals aimed at nothing less than 'felling the tree' of Hinduism itself because they found it 'Brahminical in essence, caste-bound and irrational' (Omvedt, 1994: 10). The most well-known exponent of such 'cleansing', who combined opposition to untouchability with fulsome defense of Sanatan Dharma and chaturvarna, was none other than Mahatma Gandhi himself. Since Gandhi was the most progressive thinker of the neo-Hindu revival, the secular-humanists' position with respect to Gandhi and Gandhism is a good indicator of where they stood on issues of religion and culture.

The Fabian-socialist Jawaharlal Nehru represents the best of the moderate wing of the Indian enlightenment which sought to preserve what they thought was the best of the high Hindu culture, even as they sought to free it of outdated superstitions and social prejudices. The dalit democratic-socialist and neo-Buddhist Bhimrao Ramji Ambedkar remains the undisputed leader of the radical wing, who sought nothing less than a complete annihilation of the worldview that underwrites caste. Other secularhumanists occupied a range of positions between the two poles. The Marxist-turnedradical humanist M. N. Roy, who worked with socialists inside the Congress party, was

uncompromising in rejecting Hinduism, old and new, especially that represented by Gandhism. On the other hand, an avowed socialist like Ram Manohar Lohia who saw caste as a crucial issue, accepted the necessity of Gandhi's leadership.

For all their internal disagreements, the Indian secular-humanists were united in rejecting the core of Marxist and Gandhian orthodoxies, the two most dominant intellectual-political traditions of their times. They did not treat religion as Marx's famous 'opium of the people' that eased their pain born of economic exploitation even as it created fantasies of after life. But neither did they see religion, as Gandhi did, as the oxygen that supposedly animates all of life.

The secular-humanists had a much more nuanced appreciation of the role of religion and culture in social life. They saw the dominant religious culture of India, namely Hinduism, as the fourth strand of the seamless triple-helix out of which the Constitution was woven; namely, national unity, democracy and social revolution (Austin 1999: 637). They saw Hinduism as providing a worldview which answered fundamental questions about what the world is like, how to tell right from wrong, and truth from what is not true, and how to live a good life. The Hindu worldview was more than just doctrines written in books; it was enacted in religious rituals, symbolized in myths, coded into social relationships and formal laws. In its pervasiveness, it constituted the commonsense of a people.

It was this underlying worldview, the taken-for-granted assumptions about the world that the Indian secular-humanists wanted to re-evaluate in the light of the worldview that had emerged since the beginnings of the Scientific Revolution. Cultivation of a scientific temper was not a matter of simply teaching more science in schools or funding advanced scientific research. It was rather understood broadly as an attempt to integrate the known facts and the way of thinking into a new worldview, or a new commonsense, that would learn to separate the transcendent or the supernatural both from the workings of nature and from the affairs of men and women in this world. Indian secularists were convinced that India could not be made secular and more democratic simply by adopting a new charter of laws, or by creating new political parties and holding periodic elections. They believed that a new secular commonsense will have to be created which could anchor the secular and democratic laws of modern India. As M. N. Roy insisted:

Secularism is not a political institution: it is cultural atmosphere, which cannot be created by proclamation of individuals. ... A state can not be secular as long as the people running it remain religious-minded (1968: 155).

To function well, a secular and democratic state needs a secular and democratic culture. The state in India, to use a helpful metaphor from Antonio Gramsci's *Prison* Notebooks, was merely 'an outer ditch, behind which stood the powerful system of fortresses of civil society' made up of the family, castes and religious communities. New ideas needed to percolate into these fortresses of civil society and find a resonance in the hearts and minds of citizens for new laws to become effective.

Lest they be perceived as radical iconoclasts insensitive to their context, some qualifications are in order. While the secular-humanists were passionate in their critique of India's religious temper, they were neither atheists nor naïve positivists who lacked all appreciation of the poetic, imaginative and non-rational aspects of life. Rare exceptions aside, avowed agnostics (e.g. Nehru) and atheists (e.g. Gora) were able to accommodate

religion for its social utility exemplified by Gandhi's constructive work in villages, and by the power of religion to mobilize the masses to join the freedom movement. Even B. R. Ambedkar, the most uncompromising and brilliant critic of the religious roots of caste, believed earnestly in the human need for a sense of the sacred. Nor can the secular-humanists be accused of vulgar positivism and scientism. Nehru's writings, for example, are replete with the limits of scientific reason which leaves out human concerns with purposes and meanings. They were not seeking to destroy every aspect of religion, but they were committed to challenging those aspects of the religious worldview – the metaphysics and the religious ways of knowing – that overlapped those of modern science: all empirical facts about the nature of the material world that religious metaphysics asserted or assumed, had to be made to pass the muster of modern science.

## The political context: putting social reforms on the national agenda

Most contemporary discussions of a scientific temper in India tend to start and end with Jawaharlal Nehru. Nehru is no doubt central to the saga of secularism and rationalism in modern India. His enormous popularity and prestige brought the spotlight on science which he championed, both as a tool for economic progress and as a resource for cultural enlightenment. Furthermore, the socialist wing of the Congress party which came together under Nehru's leadership provided a political home for progressive writers, poets and playwrights who injected an element of cultural critique into politics.

But Nehru was only a representative – and a rather conservative one at that – of the generation of intellectuals, freedom-fighters, political activists and scientists who came of age in the period between the two World Wars that was marked by India's struggle for freedom from the British Raj and the spread of socialist ideals around the world. What sets them apart from the mainstream of Congress Gandhians and other traditionalists was their insistence that social and religious reforms must precede political reforms. They wanted the Indian nationalist movement, led by the Indian National Congress, to launch a struggle against religious-cultural sources of oppression and ignorance with at least the same sense of urgency they showed in their struggle against imperialism and economic exploitation. They were committed to the industrial model of modernization (as opposed to the Gandhian village-based small-is-beautiful model), but they did not think industrialization alone will be enough to bring about modern and secular consciousness. They believed, to quote Ambedkar from his Annihilation of Caste: 'political revolutions have always been preceded by social and religious revolutions. … Emancipation of the mind and soul is a necessary preliminary for the political expansion of the people' (1948: 68–69). This revolution of the mind and the soul required, in M. N. Roy's words, an 'organized struggle against superstition' that would 'overwhelm the respect for tradition with a spirit of inquiry' and encourage societywide 'a criticism of religious thought, subjection of traditional beliefs and the timehonored dogmas of religion to a searching analysis' (nd: 2).

This insistence on the priority of social-religious reform was a radical stand in the face of the cooption, benign neglect and active hostility toward social reform that prevailed in much of the Indian National Congress through much of its history. A case in point is the inglorious record of the National Social Conference, the social reform arm of Indian National Congress. The Social Conference was formed in 1887 on the insistence of liberal-minded, upper-caste reformers including M. G. Ranade, and took on issues like Hindu prohibition against sea-voyages, child marriage, dowry, prohibition against widows marrying again, and very marginally, the social disabilities suffered by the 'depressed classes' (untouchables and shudras). The Conference met for a few years before it was literally driven out by traditionalists (led by Bal Gangahdar Tilak) who threatened to burn down the premises if reformers dared to show up. Even at its peak, the Conference remained deeply split between extremist Hindu nationalists and timid reformers. On the one side were vehement Hindu nationalists like Bal Gangadhar Tilak who saw even the most humane reforms (raising the age of consent for girls from 10 years to 12 years, for instance) as an unbearable admission of Hindu inferiority before the British. Other extremists included influential leaders like Lala Lajpat Rai, B. C. Pal and Sri Aurobindo. (Today's Hindu nationalists revere these extremist leaders, especially Aurobindo and Tilak). The other side was represented by reform-minded traditionalists led by M. G. Ranade and Telang who sought reform, in Ranade's words, 'not as an innovation, but as a return and restoration of our past history' (Heimsath 1964: 184). Any critique of the irrationalities and injustices of 'our past history' was simply not permitted: it was nationalism rather than Enlightenment that was the main driving force behind the national social conference.

The reformist wing of Congress continued to function until M. K. Gandhi emerged as the acknowledged leader of the party in 1916. Gandhi subsumed the social reform platform into his own 'Constructive Programme' which, among other things, promised to improve the lot of the 'depressed classes'. The constructive programme was big on promises, short on funds and paternalistic to boot. From the account Ambedkar provides in his understandably bitter book, What Congress and Gandhi have done to the Untouchable, Gandhi's idea of reform amounted to a call to caste Hindus to do good works out of the goodness of their heart. Even later, more mature reformist plans, like the Harijan Sevak Sangh launched by Gandhi in 1932, remained an upper caste affair which aimed to 'uplift' the outcastes by teaching them hygiene and temperance and such, while expressly keeping 'social reforms like abolition of caste, inter-dining … and inter-caste marriages outside the scope' of its agenda (Ambedkar, 1945: 127).

Paternalism and traditionalism remained the hallmark of Congress on matters of social and cultural issues, leading to the bitter disillusionment of dalit and backward caste movements on the one hand, and socialists on the other. The showdown came over the issue of a separate electorate for untouchables (similar to separate electorates that had already been granted to Muslims, Sikhs and the princely states). The details of the Gandhi-Ambedkar confrontation that resulted in Gandhi going on a fast and Ambedkar having to agree to a compromise (the so-called Poona Pact, signed on September 24, 1932) are not directly relevant here. But following this confrontation, the essentially Hindu nature of Gandhi's social agenda became obvious. Gandhi saw social reform as a 'penance' that the twice-born had to do for having 'neglected the untouchables for ages', while keeping the untouchables firmly in the Hindu fold for the sake of numbers in the electoral democracy that was taking shape during that time.

The Poona Pact only deepened the already existing fissures between the radical critics of caste and the leadership of the Congress party. Gradually, starting with the famous Mahad satyagrah in 1927 when dalits broke the caste taboo against drinking water from upper caste tanks, dalits began to organize themselves and sought entry into skilled industrial work, especially in the textile mills in Maharashtra which became the nucleus of dalit mobilization. The dalit movement emerged as a political force at the same time as working classes and peasantry were forming their organizations. But as Omvedt points out (1994: 166), while non-Brahman, working class and peasant movements were absorbed into the Congress party as a part of the 'anti-imperialist united front', the dalit movement managed to maintain its political and intellectual independence. One hallmark of Ambedkar's leadership of the dalit movement was his fierce rationalism and his search for a new religion which could satisfy the spiritual urges of his people without binding them to the inegalitarian and irrational worldview of Hinduism. This search finally led Ambedkar to embrace a new Buddhism.

#### Secular-humanists: the complete cast

To focus only on Nehru and Ambedkar will be like reenacting the founding of America by starring only Thomas Jefferson and Tom Paine. There is no doubt that Nehru defined the socialist stream of rationalism and reform, and Ambedkar the stream that emerged from 'below the pollution line', to borrow the very apt description from Aloysius (1997). But both streams had other brilliant and brave men and women including poets, song-writers, novelists and scientists, to say nothing of political activists and social reformers. In addition there were other thinkers who formally belonged to neither camp but have left their own mark.

Apart from Nehru himself, there are at least two other socialist thinkers who have left a valuable legacy. They are Bhagat Singh (1907–31), member of an armed 'terrorist' revolutionary socialist group who was hanged by the British for his subversive activities in 1931, and M. N. Roy (1887–1954) who moved from his youthful involvement in revolutionary 'terrorism' to become the founder of the Communist Party in India but eventually renounced Communism and turned to radical humanism.

Bhagat Singh wrote his well-known tract, Why I am an Atheist, literally under the shadow of the gallows in British jails. Bhagat Singh belongs to the select company of rationalists who refuse to take refuge in the consolation of God in their time of personal crisis and strove to 'stand like a man with an erect head to the last, even to the gallows'. Bhagat Singh came to a materialist understanding of the world through his commitment to Marxism and urged his fellow revolutionaries to 'criticize, disbelieve and challenge every item of the old faith', because he found blind faith standing in the way of full development of the intellectual and moral development of the masses.

Manendra Nath Roy was another major Marxist thinker who came to champion the cause of rationalism and humanism. A revolutionary terrorist like Bhagat Sigh, Roy discovered Marxism, rose up in the Comintern under Lenin, and helped to establish the Communist Party in India in 1925. Ideological differences over Soviet policy toward anti-colonial movements in China and India led to his eventual expulsion from Comintern and tensions with the Communist party in India. Roy formally announced his break with Marxism in 1936 by rejecting historical determinism and class war and declared that without a cultural and philosophical revolution, no social or political revolution was possible in India (Haithcox 1971). Roy was welcomed into CSP by Nehru and Jayaprakash Narayan. But Roy and many of his followers who joined CSP seemed to suffer from a sense of political messianism and did not find the party radical enough for their purist understanding of Marxist dogma. Roy himself and his followers gradually parted company from CSP for their own independent political activity outside the fold of both Congress and the Communists.

One of the contributions of the Congress socialists which outlasted the CSP itself was the encouragement and patronage it provided to the Progressive Writers'

Association that formally came together in 1936 at the Lucknow session of Congress which was presided over by Nehru. The initiative for starting an all India forum form left-leaning writers was taken up by a group of Urdu-speaking intellectuals, headed by Sajjad Zaheer, who drew up a manifesto in 1935 while studying in London. By their own account, as recorded by Mulk Raj Anand, a much admired novelist who was one of the founding members of PWA, they wanted to take a positive stand against the forces of darkness including the worldwide economic depression, Fascism in Europe and colonialism in their homeland. It was in the Nanking restaurant on Denmark Street in London in November 1935 they drew up a manifesto that laid the foundations of PWA.<sup>2</sup> Sajjad Zaheer returned to India with the manifesto and recruited well-known poets, story-tellers and novelists including Premchand (who presided over the first conference of PWA) and Faiz Ahamad Faiz to the cause of 'purposive art', art that aspired to 'rescue literature from the conservative classes' and address the problems of 'hunger and poverty, social backwardness and political subjection', as the Manifesto announced. It is worth quoting from this famous manifesto to get a better idea of what the progressive writers saw their mission as:

(1) It is the duty of Indian writers to give expression to the changes in Indian life and to assist the spirit of progress in the country by introducing scientific rationalistm in literature. They should undertake to develop an attitude of literary criticism which will discourage the general reactionary and revivalist tendencies on questions like family, religion, sex, war and society and to combat literary trends reflecting communalism, racial antagonism, sexual libertinism and exploitation of man by man. …

(4) All that arouses in us the critical spirit, which examines customs and institutions in the light of reason, which helps us to act, to organize ourselves, to transform, we accept as progressive (Malik 1967).

The movement was immediately attacked as being a pawn of the Communists and as being disrespectful of people's religion, to which PWA responded by insisting that most of the writers associated with it had nothing to do with Communism, and that the PWA did not consider religious faith as a 'disembodied concept' but assessed it in terms of the impact they had on social life (Zaheer: 81). The influence of PWA, even at its peak, remained limited to Urdu writers including Faiz Ahmad Faiz, Sahir Ludhianwi, Rajinder Singh Bedi, Amrita Pritam, Krishan Chander and Upedra Nath Ashk. Hindi writers, perhaps representing Hindu nationalist biases stayed away. The Partition broke the bonds, physically separating the writers in different countries. Even though short-lived, PWA provided a model for engaged artists and intellectuals.

The second, and far more substantial, stream of intellectuals and activists came to the secular humanist position through their first-hand experience of living below the pollution line. British colonialism which simultaneously colluded with upper castes and opened up new opportunities for the lower castes, opened the floodgates to waves of protests against the old order. It was as though the subaltern castes 'were waking up to the fact that they were no longer inhabiting a prison', and that they could break out of the demeaning occupations they had been consigned to based upon their birth (Aloysius, 1998: 77).

A fierce rationalism, often verging on complete atheism, was the hallmark of those anti-caste movements which have had the most lasting impact through the 19th and 20th centuries. The revolutionary neo-Buddhism of Bhimrao Ramji Ambedkar (1891–1956), one of the architects of India's Constitution, was anticipated by the Satya Shodhak Samaj of Jotirao Phule (1827–90) which combined the rationalism and egalitarianism of Buddha and Kabir with a close reading of Thomas Paine's The Rights of Man and The Age of Reason, to propagate an alternative to the worldview of Brahminism. Other backward caste leaders, notably Iyothee Thass (1845–1914) and Lakshmi Narasu (1861–1934) in Tamil Nadu also turned to the teachings of the historical Buddha to defy the religious legitimation of caste. The turn to Buddhism found its final culmination in the lifework of Ambedkar.

Dalit rationalism was not always contained within the limits of religion, however enlightened the religious tradition might be. The case in point is the complete atheism of E. V. Ramasamy Naicker (1879–1973), popularly known as 'Periyar', or 'the great man', who founded the Self-Respect League in Tamil Nadu in 1926. Periyar began his career as a Congressman sympathetic to Gandhi's constructive work but became a severe critic of Gandhi's Hindu traditionalism. While he admired the modernist rationalist Buddhism of Iyothee Thass, he refused to propagate Buddhism or any other religion. He completely gave up on all conceptions of god and developed atheism as a 'creative mode of engagement with the problems of faith in a society ruled by caste' (Geetha and Rajadurai 1998: 308). A similar movement away from the enlightened, rationalistic Vedantism can be found among some followers of Narayan Guru (1854– 1928) one of the most influential anti-caste reformers of the state of Kerala. Narayan Guru, an ascetic belonging to the lowly Ezhavas caste of toddy tappers, tried to 'de-Brahminize' Hindu gods and rituals by setting up alternative temples open to all castes and by turning these temples into centers for secular learning. Some of Guru's followers, including Kerala's well-known rationalist K. Ayyappan (1889–1968), broke away from the God-centeredness of Guru's teachings. Ayyappan famously changed Narayan Guru's motto of 'One Caste, One Religion and One God for Man' to 'No Caste, No religion and No God for Man'.

Rationalists were pretty unanimously opposed to Gandhian faith-based politics, which they saw as deeply conservative. But Gandhi's 'constructive program' among the rural masses proved to be attractive enough for some committed rationalists and radical critics of caste. The well-known atheist Goparaju Ramchandra Rao, aka Gora (1902–75) who popularized the concept of 'positive atheism' and founded the wellknown Atheist Center in Vijaywada in Andhra Pradesh, ended up as an admirer of Gandhi and continued with Gandhian social programs for economic equality even after Gandhi's death. As he describes in his book, An Atheist with Gandhi, what brought together the two men with such divergent views regarding God and religion was their pragmatism: Gandhi accepted Gora's atheism as he thought that it could break the barriers between different castes and religious groups, while Gora accepted Gandhi's theism because it did not prevent him from manifesting a free will in practical reforms.

Finally, mention must also be made of the nascent community of Indian scientists. Starting in 1817 with the establishment of Hindu College in Calcutta (which became Presidency College in 1855), a number of important colleges and universities were established in Calcutta, Aligarh, Delhi, Madras and Bombay that introduced the sons of Indian elite to developments in modern science. The growing aspirations of Indian scientists for professional recognition and advancement under the colonial regime, which did not have a high opinion of Indian science, led Mahendra Lal Sircar, a graduate of Calcutta Medical College, to agitate for the formation of the Indian Association of the Cultivation of Science in 1876. By the early decades of the 20th century, India had already chalked up considerable successes on the international scene: Jagdish Chandra Bose, Prafulla Chandra Ray, C. V. Raman had established themselves as international authorities in their fields, with Raman winning the Noble Prize in 1930. By the time of the freedom struggle and independence, India already had a second generation of natural scientists, represented most prominently by M. N. Saha, P. C. Mahalanobis, Homi Bhabha, among others (Lourdusamy 2004; Baber 1996).

While they won international recognition for their work (which was quite a remarkable achievement, given the British condescension and prejudices they had to fight against), this generation of scientists remained highly ambivalent about their own religious-cultural beliefs. They seemed to be split between rationalism and nationalism, between their allegiance to the universal republic of science and the allegiance they felt toward their culture and religion. While they understood how badly the spiritualist metaphysics, mystical epistemology and caste-based division of labor had retarded the progress of science in India, they were simultaneously driven to defend the scientific abilities of the 'Hindu mind', while denigrating the Islamic contributions to Indian science and technology. While they urged their compatriots to adopt new methods of learning, many (especially P. C. Ray and J. C. Bose) presented modern science largely as a revival of scientific methods of ancient Hindu rishis, often casting themselves as new rishis and their laboratories as temples of learning. With the notable exception of Meghnad Saha, who was outspoken in his critique of Vedic orthodoxy and Gandhian anti-modernism, other scientists of this era did not use their scientific knowledge to examine the validity of the metaphysical truths that served to explain nature for the vast majority of their countrymen.

#### The meaning of a scientific temper

The phrase 'scientific temper' is not particularly Indian, but it has a uniquely Indian flavor and fervor to it. In the Indian context, the call for cultivating a scientific temper was more than a mere slogan promoting critical thinking in general: it was a call for redefining what constituted truth, evidence and reason. Like the *philosophes* of the Enlightenment, Indian secularists were trying to re-evaluate the entire episteme of their culture in light of the knowledge made available by modern science. Their task was much more arduous since they were working in the shadow of the colonial masters, whose ideas they simultaneously admired *and* resisted. The British had looked at India either through the romantic lens of theosophy and spiritualism, or through the lens of Christian missionaries who saw nothing but pagan darkness in Indian culture. The challenge before the Indian enlighteners was to avoid both these extremes. Their task was to develop an understanding of the scientific method and scientific spirit that demarcated it from mystical ways of knowing, but which was not completely cut off from the existing cultural traditions and religious inheritance of the people of India.

The writings of M. N. Roy and to a lesser extent, Nehru, stand out for putting flesh on the idea of a scientific temper and connecting it to the universal history of ideas. On the other hand, the writings of Ambedkar are unique in their attempt to connect modern scientific rationality to a living (albeit minority) religious tradition, namely, Buddhism. Moreover, the neo-Buddhist Ambedkar and the rationalist-atheist Perivar and the 'positive-atheist' Gora have left behind a valuable legacy of new traditions and new rituals of birth, marriage and death that do away with gods and the immortal soul and yet enable ordinary people to find a sense of sacredness.

#### 184 Meera Nanda

Nehru's writings, especially his *Discovery of India*, provide many glimpses of his genuine wonder and excitement at the breakthroughs that modern science made in exploring and understanding the world we live in. As a student of history, Nehru understood very well that the scientific revolution had brought about a radical transformation of the criteria of reason which had universal implications. He wanted India to awaken to this revolution in the fullest way possible, which meant not just borrowing new technologies, but questioning the truths we hold sacred and infallible on the authority of the ancients. Nehru described a scientific temper as

the adventurous and yet critical temper of science [which demands] the search for truth and new knowledge, the refusal to accept anything without testing and trial. the capacity to change previous conclusions in the face of new evidence and the reliance on observed fact and not on preconceived theory, the hard discipline of the mind ... (Nehru, 1956: 525).

While he fully recognized that there are human experiences which lie beyond the reach of science, which deals with the material and sensible world. Nehru insisted that the spirit of science – that is, the spirit of questioning, the spirit of fallibility and willingness to change one's beliefs in proportion with the evidence –

is necessary for life itself and the solution of its many problems. Too many scientists today, who swear by science, forget all about it outside their particular spheres. The scientific approach and temper are, or should be, a way of life, a process of thinking, a method of acting and associating with our fellow-men. Scientific temper is the temper of a free man ... (DI,  $525-26$ ).

M. N. Roy's words, below, also convey the flavor of what scientific outlook meant to the modernist-secularists:

A philosophical revolution is a precondition for the much delayed but inevitable national renaissance of India ... the adoption of a scientific outlook, the application of the scientific method to the problems of life will necessarily mean the rejection of ideas, ideals, institutions and traditions that are cherished as the peculiar features of Indian culture (Roy 1997: 407).

But what was the 'scientific outlook' and how did it differ from the religious outlook?

[T]he scientific outlook is essentially materialistic – a term so very misunderstood and piously abhorred in India. Scientific outlook does not take anything for granted. It does not admit miracles, occasional or perpetual. It seeks and eventually finds the cause of every phenomenon. ... It is based on positive knowledge, not on belief, speculation or fantasy. As such, it is hostile to the religious, metaphysical and teleological view of the universe, life, history and society. The religious view is opposed to all free inquiry. Its pivot is authority, which defies or eludes empirical test ... (ibid.: 407-8).

These statements give a flavor of the kind of broad and deep critique of religious reason the modernists had in mind when they talked of modern science and a scientific temper. Clearly, they were arguing for more than merely spreading scientific literacy, and popularizing current scientific facts and figures: they were trying to bring the fundamental metaphysical presuppositions and ways of knowing prescribed by Hinduism in tune with scientific knowledge. They sought to replace the traditional Hindu ideal of 'eternal' and infallible 'Truth' with a more humble and a more fallible view of knowledge which could be backed by the kind of evidence that all people, using their ordinary five senses and basic rules of logic, could ascertain for themselves.

#### The fate of the scientific temper

In this concluding section, we will ask a simple question: What happened to the legacy of secular-humanists?

The short answer is: nothing much. The organized attack on superstition that the secular-humanist championed never materialized. India acquired the trappings of a modern nation-state without undergoing a classic class revolution. Or rather, the mostly upper-caste bourgeoisie took control of the machinery of the state, the industry and the civil society without demanding or encouraging any serious revision of the essentials of elite, Sanksritic Hinduism. Indeed, rather than deploy a scientific temper to purge Indian culture of the Hindu myths and metaphysical claims, as the rationalists tried so valiantly, science has been used mostly to *bolster* these false myths and metaphysical schemes.

The obvious question is *why* secular-humanist ideas failed to engage the imagination and conscience of the urban industrial and commercial bourgeoisie, the rural ownerproducers or even the white-collar mental workers/intellectuals in the agencies of the state and civil society. The greatest mystery of all is why even those with advanced degrees in natural sciences have shown no great enthusiasm for cultivating a scientific outlook. Even on such matters that directly overlap with science's territory – the existence of atman, the truth of reincarnation and karma, the possibility of miracles, the efficacy of rituals and prayers, the mystical ways of knowing etc. – the Indian scientific community has been largely conspicuous by its silence.

Part of the explanation surely lies in the dismal state of education, including science education. Learning science is more a matter of the memorization of facts rather than mastering the critical thinking and careful weighing of evidence that science requires. Moreover, in conditions of rather severe deprivation that many millions still suffer, there is not much motivation to deny the gods and their miracles.

But there are at least two other more serious factors, specific to Indian society, that seem to have played a role in dampening the momentum for rationalism. To begin with, there seems to be an elective affinity between those on the lower rungs of caste hierarchy and scientific rationalism. It is true that not all anti-caste movements have been rationalist, but all rationalist movements have been stridently anti-caste and all have attracted intellectuals and activists from anti-caste movements. Most Indian scientists and intellectuals come from privileged upper-caste backgrounds and feel quite at home in the inherited religious traditions and do not feel the existential or emotional need to examine these traditions critically.

Secondly, leading voices of protest and transformation in India have come from the Marxist tradition. While theoretically very sophisticated, Indian Marxists have remained stuck in a rather mechanical understanding of Marxism and not paid sufficient attention to the role of religion, culture and ideas in general in perpetuating *caste*  inequities. This neglect of ideas has been compounded by the nationalistic and populist strains in the non-Marxist, Gandhian intellectuals who in recent past have spent more time and energy in condemning the Orientalism of the British imperialists rather than fighting the indigenous force of custom and habit.

In conclusion, the project of the Indian Enlightenment remains incomplete.

## Notes

- 1 By 'secular-humanist' I simply mean someone who believes that 'the affairs of human beings should be governed not by faith in the supernatural but by reliance of reason and evidence adduced from the natural world' (Jacoby 2004: 4).
- 2 The original signatories in London included: Jyoti Ghosh, Mulk Raj Anand, Promode Sengupta, Mohammad Din Taseer and Sajjad Zaheer. See the memoir-cum-history of PWA by Sajjad Zaheer titled Roshnai that he wrote in a Pakistani prison.

# References

Aloysius, G. (1997) Nationalism without a Nation, New Delhi: Oxford University Press.

Ambedkar, Bhimrao R. (1936) The Annihilation of Caste, Jalandhar: Beem Patrika.

- —— (1945) What Congress and Gandhi have done to the Untouchables, Bombay: Thacker and Co.
- Austin, Granville (1999) Working a Democratic Constitution: A History of Indian Experience, New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
- Baber, Zaheer (1996) The Science of Empire, Albany: State University of New York.
- Geetha, V. and Rajadurai, S. V. (1998) Toward a non-Brahmin Millennium, Calcutta: Samya Press.
- Gora (Goparaju Ramchandra Rao) (n.d.) An Atheist with Gandhi, http://positiveatheism.org.
- Haithcox, John P. (1971) Communism and Nationalism in India: M.N. Roy and Comintern Policy, 1920–1939, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
- Heimsath, Charles (1964) Indian Nationalism and Hindu Social Reform, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
- Israel, Jonathan (2001) Radical Enlightenment: Philosophy and the Making of Modernity, 1650– 1750, New York: Oxford University Press.
- Jacoby, Susan (2004) Freethinkers: History of American Secularism, New York: Free Press.
- Kors, Alan C. (2003) Preface, Encyclopedia of the Enlightenment, vol. 1, New York: Oxford University Press.
- Lourdusamy, J. (2004) Science and the National Consciousness in Bengal, 1870–1930, New Delhi: Orient Longman.
- Malik, Hafeez (1967) 'The Marxist literary movements in India and Pakistan', Journal of Asian Studies, 24(4): 649–64.
- Nehru, Jawaharlal (1951) Discovery of India, London: Meridian.
- Omvedt, Gail (1994) Dalits and the Democratic Revolution: Dr. Ambedkar and the Dalit Movement in Colonial India, New Delhi: Sage.
- Ray, Sibnarayan (ed.) (1997) Collected Works of M.N. Roy, Vol. IV, 1932–36, New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
- Roy, M. N. (1968) 'Secularism, indeed!' in V. K. Sinha (ed.) Secularism in India, Bombay: Lalvani Publishing House.

—— (n.d.) Science and Superstition, Dehradun: Indian Renaissance Association Ltd.

Zaheer, Sajaad (2006) Roshnai: The Light: A History of the Movement for Progressive Literature in the Indo-Pak Subcontinent (A translation of Roshnai by Amina Azfar), Karachi: Oxford University Press.