## 19 Righting wrongs<sup>1</sup>

## Gavatri Chakravorty Spivak

The primary nominative sense of *rights* cited by the *Oxford English Dictionary* is 'justifiable claim, on legal or moral grounds, to have or obtain something, or to act in a certain way.' There is no parallel usage of *wrongs*, connected to an agent in the possessive  $\text{case} - \text{`my wrongs'} - \text{or given to it as an object of the verb to have } - \text{`she has wrongs.'}$ 

*Rights* entail an individual or collective. *Wrongs*, however, cannot be used as a noun, except insofar as an other, as agent of injustice, is involved. The verb *to wrong* is more common than the noun, and indeed the noun probably gets its enclitic meaning by back-formation from the verb.

The word *rights* in 'Human Rights, Human Wrongs', the title of the 2001 Oxford Amnesty Lectures series in which this chapter was first presented, acquires verbal meaning by its contiguity with the word wrongs.<sup>2</sup> The verb to right cannot be used intransitively on this level of abstraction. It can only be used with the unusual noun *wrong*: 'to right a wrong,' or 'to right wrongs.' Thus 'Human Rights' is not only about having or claiming a right or a set of rights; it is also about righting wrongs, about being the dispenser of these rights. The idea of human rights, in other words, may carry within itself the agenda of a kind of social Darwinism – the fittest must shoulder the burden of righting the wrongs of the unfit – and the possibility of an alibi. Only a 'kind of' Social Darwinism, of course. Just as 'the white man's burden,' undertaking to civilize and develop, was only 'a kind of' oppression. It would be silly to footnote the scholarship that has been written to show that the latter may have been an alibi for economic, military, and political intervention. It is on that model that I am using the concept-metaphor of the alibi in these introductory paragraphs.

Having arrived here, the usual thing is to complain about the Eurocentrism of human rights. I have no such intention. I am of course troubled by the use of human rights as an alibi for interventions of various sorts. But its so-called European provenance is for me in the same category as the 'enabling violation' of the production of the colonial subject (Spivak 1999a: 217 n33).<sup>3</sup> One cannot write off the righting of wrongs. The enablement must be used even as the violation is renegotiated.

Colonialism was committed to the education of a certain class. It was interested in the seemingly permanent operation of an altered normality. Paradoxically, human rights and 'development' work today cannot claim this self-empowerment that high colonialism could. Yet, some of the best products of high colonialism, descendants of the colonial middle class, become human rights advocates in the countries of the South. [...]

The end of the Second World War inaugurated the postcolonial dispensation. [...] For the eighteenth century Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen by the National Assembly of France the 'nation is essentially the source of sovereignty; nor

can any individual, or any body of men, be entitled to any authority which is not expressly derived from it' (cited in Paine 1992: 79). A hundred and fifty years later, for better or for worse, the human rights aspect of post-coloniality has turned out to be the breaking of the new nations, in the name of their breaking-in into the international community of nations.<sup>4</sup> This is the narrative of international maneuvering. Thomas Risse, Stephen Ropp, and Kathryn Sikkink's book, *The Power of Human Rights* (1999), takes the narrative further. In addition to the dominant states, they argue, since 1993 it is the transnational agencies, plus nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), that subdue the state.

Nevertheless, it is still disingenuous to call human rights Eurocentric, not only because, in the global South, the domestic human rights workers are, by and large, the descendants of the colonial subject, often culturally positioned against Eurocentrism. but also because, internationally, the role of the new diasporic is strong, and the diasporic in the metropolis stands for 'diversity,' 'against Eurocentrism.' Thus the work of righting wrongs is shared above a class line that to some extent and unevenly cuts across race and the North-South divide. I say 'to some extent and unevenly' because, to be located in the Euro-U.S. still makes a difference. In the UN itself, 'the main human rights monitoring function [has been] allocated to the OSCE'. The presuppositions of Risse, Ropp, and Sikkink's book also make this clear. The subtitle – 'International Norms and Domestic Change' - is telling. The authors' idea of the motor of human rights is 'pressure' on the state 'from above' - international - and 'from below' domestic. (It is useful for this locationist privilege that most NGOs of the global South survive on Northern aid.) [...]

This is pressure 'from below,' of course. Behind these 'societal actors' and the state is 'international normative pressure.' I will go on to suggest that, unless 'education' is thought differently from 'consciousness-raising' about 'the human rights norm' and 'rising literacy expand[ing] the individual's media exposure,' 'sufficient habitualization or institutionalization' will never arrive, and this will continue to provide justification for international control (Risse, Ropp and Sikkink 1999: 167).

Thinking about education and the diaspora, Edward Said has recently written that 'the American University generally [is] for its academic staff and many of its students the last remaining utopia' (2000: xi). The philosopher Richard Rorty as well as Lee Kuan Yew, the former prime minister of Singapore – who supported 'detention without trial ... [as] Confucianist' – share Professor Said's view of the utopianism of the Euro-U.S. university. I quote Rorty, but I invite you to read Premier Lee's From Third World to First: The Singapore Story: 1965–2000 to savor their accord: 'Producing generations of nice, tolerant, well-off, secure, other-respecting students of [the American] sort in all parts of the world is just what is needed  $-$  indeed all that is needed  $-$ to achieve an Enlightenment utopia. The more youngsters like that we can raise, the stronger and more global our human rights culture will become' (Rorty 1993: 127).<sup>5</sup>

If one wishes to make this restricted utopianism, which extends to great universities everywhere, available for global social justice, one must unmoor it from its elite safe harbors, supported by the power of the dominant nation's civil polity, and be interested in a kind of education for the largest sector of the future electorate in the global South  $-$  the children of the rural poor  $-$  that would go beyond literacy and numeracy and find a home in an expanded definition of a 'Humanities to come.'

Education in the Humanities attempts to be an *uncoercive* rearrangement of desires. If you are not persuaded by this simple description, nothing I say about the Humanities will move you. This is the burden of the second section of this chapter. This simple but difficult practice is outlined there. It is only when we interest ourselves in this new kind of education for the children of the rural poor in the global South that the inevitability of unremitting pressure as the *primum mobile* of human rights will be questioned.

If one engages in such empowerment at the lowest level, it is in the hope that the need for international/domestic-elite pressure on the state will not remain primary forever. We cannot necessarily expect the old colonial subject transformed into the new domestic middle-class urban radical, defined as 'below' by Risse, Ropp, and Sikkink and by metropolitan human rights in general, to engage in the attempt I will go on to describe. Although physically based in the South, and therefore presumably far from the utopian university, this class is generally also out of touch with the mindset  $-$  a combination of episteme and ethical discourse – of the rural poor below the NGO level. To be able to present a project that will draw aid from the North, for example, to understand and state a problem intelligibly and persuasively for the taste of the North, is itself proof of a sort of epistemic discontinuity with the ill-educated rural poor. (And the sort of education we are thinking of is not to make the rural poor capable of drafting NGO grant proposals!) This discontinuity, not skin color or national identity crudely understood, undergirds the question of who always rights and who is perennially wronged.

I have been suggesting, then, that 'human rights culture' runs on unremitting Northern-ideological pressure, even when it is from the South; that there is a real epistemic discontinuity between the Southern human rights advocates and those whom they protect.<sup>6</sup> In order to shift this layered discontinuity, however slightly, we must focus on the quality and end of education, at both ends; the Southern elite is often educated in Western or Western-style institutions. We must work at both ends – both in Said/Rorty's utopia and in the schools of the rural poor in the global South.

I will argue this by way of a historical and theoretical digression.

As long as the claim to natural or inalienable human rights was reactive to the historical alienation in 'Europe' as such – the French ancien régime or the German Third  $\text{Reich}$  – the problem of relating 'natural' to 'civil' rights was on the agenda. Since its use by the Commission on Decolonization in the 1960s, its thorough politicization in the 1990s, when the nation-states of the South, and perhaps the nation-state form itself, needed to be broken in the face of the restructuring demands of globalization, and its final inclusion of the postcolonial subject in the form of the metropolitan diasporic, that particular problem – of relating 'natural' to 'civil' rights – was quietly forgotten. In other words, that the question of nature must be begged (assumed when it needs to be demonstrated), in order to use it historically, has been forgotten. [..]

I have not the expertise to summarize the long history of the European debate surrounding natural/civil rights. With some hesitation I would point at the separation/ imbrication of nature and liberty in Machiavelli, at the necessary slippage in Hobbes between social contract as natural fiction and social contract as civil reality, at Hobbes's debate on liberty and necessity with Bishop Bramhill. Hobbes himself places his discussions within debates in Roman law and I think we should respect this chain of displacements  $-$  rather than a linear intellectual history  $-$  that leads to the rupture of the first European Declaration of Human Rights.<sup>7</sup> I am arguing that such speculative lines are not allowed to flourish within today's global human rights activities where a crude notion of cultural difference is about as far as grounds talk will go.

Academic research may contest this trend by tracking rational critique and/or individualism within non-European high cultures. This is valuable work. But the usually silent victims of pervasive rather than singular and spectacular human rights violations are generally the rural poor. These academic efforts do not touch their general cultures, unless it is through broad generalizations, positive and negative. Accessing those longdelegitimized epistemes requires a different engagement. The pedagogic effort that may bring about lasting epistemic change in the oppressed is never accurate, and must be forever renewed. Otherwise there does not seem much point in considering the Humanities worth teaching. And, as I have already signaled, the red thread of a defense of the Humanities as an attempt at uncoercive rearrangement of desires runs through this chapter.

Attempts at such pedagogic change need not necessarily involve confronting the task of undoing the legacy of a specifically *colonial* education. Other political upheavals have also divided the postcolonial or global polity into an effective class apartheid. The redressing work of Human Rights must be supplemented by an education that can continue to make unstable the presupposition that the reasonable righting of wrongs is inevitably the manifest destiny of groups - unevenly class-divided, embracing North and South  $-$  that remain poised to right them; and that, among the receiving groups, wrongs will inevitably proliferate with unsurprising regularity. Consequently, the groups that are the dispensers of human rights must realize that, just as the natural Rights of Man were contingent upon the historical French Revolution, and the Universal Declaration upon the historical events that led to the Second World War, so also is the current emergence, of the human rights model as the global dominant, contingent upon the turbulence in the wake of the dissolution of imperial formations and global economic restructuring. The task of making visible the begged question grounding the political manipulation of a civil society forged on globally defined natural rights is just as urgent; and not simply by way of *cultural* relativism.

[...] What we are describing is a simplified version of the aporia between ethics and politics. An aporia is disclosed only in its one-way crossing. This essay attempts to make the reader recognize that human rights is such an interested crossing, a containment of the aporia in binary oppositions. $8$ 

A few words, then, about supplementing metropolitan education before I elaborate on the pedagogy of the subaltern. By *subaltern* I mean those removed from lines of social mobility.<sup>9</sup>

I will continue to insist that the problem with U.S. education is that it teaches (corporatist) benevolence while trivializing the teaching of the Humanities. The result is, at best, cultural relativism as cultural absolutism ('American-style education will do the trick'). Its undoing is best produced by way of the training of reflexes that kick in at the time of urgency, of decision and policy. However unrealistic it may seem to you, I would not remain a teacher of the Humanities if I did not believe that at the New York end  $-$  standing metonymically for the dispensing end as such  $-$  the teacher can try to rearrange desires noncoercively  $-$  as I mentioned earlier  $-$  through an attempt to develop in the student a habit of literary reading, even just 'reading,' suspending oneself into the text of the other  $-$  for which the first condition and effect is a suspension of the conviction that I am necessarily better, I am necessarily indispensable, I am necessarily the one to right wrongs, I am necessarily the end product for which history happened, and that New York is necessarily the capital of the world. A training in literary reading is a training to learn from the singular and the unverifiable. Although literature cannot

speak, this species of patient reading, miming an effort to make the text respond, as it were, is a training not only in poiesis, accessing the other so well that probable action can be prefigured, but teleo-poiesis, striving for a response from the distant other, without guarantees.

I have no moral position against grading, or writing recommendation letters. But if you are attempting to train in specifically literary reading, the results are not directly ascertainable by the teaching subject, and perhaps not the taught subject either. In my experience, the 'proof 'comes in unexpected ways, from the other side. But the absence of such proof does not necessarily 'mean' nothing has been learned. This is why I say 'no guarantees.' And that is also why the work of an epistemic undoing of cultural relativism as cultural absolutism can only work as a supplement to the more institutional practice, filling a responsibility shaped gap but also adding something discontinuous. As far as human rights goes, this is the only prior and patient training that can leaven the quick-fix training institutes that prepare international civil society workers, including human rights advocates, with uncomplicated standards for success. This is not a suggestion that all human rights workers should have institutional Humanities training. As it stands, Humanities teaching in the United States is what I am describing only in the very rare instance. And the mode is 'to come.'

It is in the interest of supplementing metropolitan Humanities pedagogy, rather than from the perspective of some fantasmatic cultural difference, that we can say that the 'developed postcapitalist structure' of today's world must 'be filled with the more robust imperative to responsibility that capitalist social productivity was obliged to destroy. We must learn to redefine that lost imperative as defective for the emergence of capitalism, rather than necessarily precapitalist on an interested sequential evolutionary model' (Spivak 1999b: 68). In the simplest terms, being defined by the call of the other – which may be a defining feature of such societies – is not conducive to the extraction and appropriation of surplus. Making room for *otium* and living in the rhythm of the eco-biome does not lead to exploration and conquest of nature. And so on. The method of a specifically literary training, a slow mind-changing process, can be used to open the imagination to such mindsets. $^{10}$ 

One of the reasons international communism failed was because Marx, an organic intellectual of the industrial revolution, could only think the claiming of rights to freedom from exploitation by way of the public use of reason recommended by the European Enlightenment. The ethical part, to want to exercise the freedom to redistribute, after the revolution, comes by way of the sort of education I am speaking of. [...] A desire to redistribute is not the unproblematic consequence of a well-fed society. In order to get that desire moving by the cultural imperative of education, you have to fix the possibility of putting not just *wrong* over against *right*, with all the genealogical lines compressed within it, but also to suggest that another antonym of *right* is *responsibility*, and further, that the possibility of such responsibility is underived from rights. [...]

The responsibility I speak of is not necessarily the one that comes from the consciousness of superiority lodged in the self, [..] but one that is, to begin with, sensed before sense as a call of the other.

Instead, varieties of the Churchillian sense of 'responsibility' - 'The price of greatness is responsibility'  $-$  nearly synonymous with duty, have always also been used from within the Rights camp. Machiavelli and Hobbes both wrote on duty. The 1793 version of the Declaration of the Rights of Man already contained a section on the duties of man and of the citizen. The UN issued a Declaration of Responsibilities – little more than a reinscription of the rights as duties for their establishment  $-$  in 1997. There is a scientists' Declaration of Duties. And so on. This is the trajectory of the idea of 'responsibility' as assumed, by choice, by the group that can right wrongs. However, even a liberal vision (like that of Amnesty International) is obliged to admit that there is no continuous line from rights to responsibilities. This notion of responsibility as the 'duty of the fitter self' toward less fortunate others (rather than the predication of being-human as being called by the other, before will) is not my meaning, of course. I remain concerned, however, by one of its corollaries in global social movements. The leaders from the domestic 'below' – for the subaltern an 'above' – not realizing the historically established discontinuity between themselves and the subaltern, counsel self-help with great supervisory benevolence. This is important to remember because the subalterns' obvious inability to do so without sustained supervision is seen as proof of the need for continued intervention. It is necessary to be involved in the everyday working (the 'textuality') of global social movements to recognize that the seeming production of 'declarations' from these supervised groups is written to dictation and no strike against class apartheid. 'To claim rights is your duty' is the banal lesson that the above – whether Northern or Southern – then imparts to the below. The organization of international conferences with exceptionalist tokenization to represent collective subaltern will is a last-ditch solution, for both sides, if at all. And, sometimes, [...] the unwitting native informant is rather far from the subaltern. [...]

It can seem at first glance that if the Euro-U.S. mindset modifies itself by way of what used to be called, just yesterday, Third Way politics, providing a cover for social democracy's rightward swing, perhaps the dispensers of human rights would at least modify their arrogance. As George W. Bush claims Tony Blair as his chum on Bush's visit to Britain in July 2001, I believe it is still worth examining this impulse, however briefly, so that it is not offered as a panacea. Let us look at a few crucial suggestions from *Beyond Left and Right* by Anthony Giddens, the academic spokesperson of the Third Way (1994: 165, 247, 184, 185, 190, 194).<sup>11</sup>

Giddens mentions the virtues of Third World poverty and therefore may seem at first glance to be recommending learning from the subaltern. Criticizing the welfare state, he quotes Charles Murray with approval: 'Murray, whose work has been influenced by experiences in rural Thailand, asks the question, what's wrong with being poor (once people are above the level of subsistence poverty)? Why should there be such a general concern to combat poverty?' I hope it is clear that I have no interest in keeping the subaltern poor. To repeat, it is in view of Marx's hope to transform the subaltern – whom he understood only as the worker in his conjuncture – into an agent of the undoing of class apartheid rather than its victim that this effort at educating the educator is undertaken.

[...] How is Professor Giddens going to persuade global finance and world trade to jettison the culture of economic growth? This question is particularly pertinent in 2009. He is, of course, speaking of state policy in Europe, but his book tries to go beyond into other spaces: 'The question remains whether a lifestyle pact as suggested here for the wealthy countries could also work when applied to the divisions between North and South. Empirically, one certainly could not answer this question positively with any degree of assurance. Analytically speaking, however, one could ask, what other possibility is there?'<sup> $12$ </sup>

However utopian it might seem, it now appears to me that the only way to make these sweeping changes – there is nothing inherently wrong with them, and, of course, I give Professor Giddens the benefit of the doubt – is for those who teach in the Humanities to take seriously the necessary but impossible task to construct a collectivity among the dispensers of bounty as well as the victims of oppression. Learning from the subaltern is, paradoxically, through teaching. In practical terms, working across the class-culture difference, trying to learn from children, and from the behavior of class' 'inferiors,' the teacher learns to recognize, not just a benevolently coerced assent, but also an unexpected response. For such an education speed, quantity of information, and number of students reached are not exclusive virtues. Those 'virtues' are inefficient for education in the responsibilities in the Humanities, not so much a sense of being responsible for, but of being responsible to, before will. Institutionally, the Humanities, like all disciplines, must be subject to a calculus. It is how we earn our living. But where 'living' has a larger meaning, the Humanities are without guarantees.

Speaking with reference to the Rights of Man and the Universal Declaration, I am insisting that in the European context, it used to be recognized that the question of nature as the ground of rights must be begged in order to use it historically. The assumption that it is natural to be angled toward the other, before will, the question of responsibility in subordinate cultures, is also a begged question. Neither can survive without the other, if it is a just world that we seem to be obliged to want. Indeed, any interest in human rights for others, in human rights and human wrongs, would do better if grounded in this second begged question, to redress historical balance, as it were, than in the apparent forgetting of the other one. In the beginning are two begged questions. […]

In the 'real world,' there is, in general, a tremendously uneven contradiction between those who beg the question of nature as rights for the self and those who beg the question of responsibility as being called by the other, before will.

If we mean to place the latter – perennial victims – on the way to the social productivity of capital, we need to acknowledge the need for supplementation there as well, rather than transform them willy-nilly, consolidating already existing hierarchies, exporting gender struggle, by way of the greed for economic growth. (I have argued earlier in this chapter that these cultures started stagnating because their cultural axiomatics were defective for capitalism. I have also argued that the socialist project can receive its ethical push not from within itself but by supplementation from such axiomatics. I have argued that in their current decrepitude the subaltern cultures need to be known in such a way that we can suture their reactivated cultural axiomatics into the principles of the Enlightenment. I have argued that socialism belongs to those axiomatics. That socialism turns capital formation into redistribution is a truism.13 It is by this logic that supplementation into the Enlightenment is as much the possibility of being the agent of the social productivity of capital as it is of the subjectship of human rights).

The general culture of Euro-U.S. capitalism in globalization and economic restructuring has conspicuously destroyed the possibility of capital being redistributive and socially productive in a broad-based way. As I have mentioned here, 'the burden of the fittest' – a reterritorializing of 'the white man's burden' – does also touch the economic sphere. […]

Meanwhile, the seriousness of training into the general culture is reflected by the fact that Morgan Stanley Dean Witter, Merrill Lynch, and other big investment companies are accessing preschoolers; children are training parents to manage portfolios. There is a growing library of books making it 'fun' for kids to invest and giving them detailed instructions how to do so. The unquestioned assumption that to be rich is to be happy and good is developed by way of many 'educational' excuses. [...]

Such a training of children builds itself on the loss of the cultural habit of assuming the agency of responsibility in radical alterity. It is followed through by the relentless education into business culture in academic and on-the-job training, in management, consumer behavior, marketing, prepared for by the thousands and thousands of business schools all over the global South as well as the North, training undergraduates into business culture, making the supplementation of the responsibility-based subaltern layer by the ethics of class-culture difference altogether impossible, consolidating class apartheid. The Declaration of the Right to Development is part of such acculturation into the movements of finance capital. Third Way talk floats on this base. Culturalist support is provided on the Internet  $-$  in book digests on 'market Taoism' and 'Aristotle for capitalism'.<sup>14</sup> It is provided in the sales presentations of countless telecommunication marketing conferences. It connects to the laughing and frequent exhortations to 'follow the money' at women's rights meetings at the UN. We should keep all this in mind when we give Professor Giddens the benefit of the doubt. [...]

Such a training of children is also a legitimation by reversal of our own insistence on elementary pedagogy of the rural poor. Supplementation by the sort of education I am trying to describe becomes necessary here, so that the relationship between child investors and child laborers is not simply one of righting wrongs from above. How does such supplementation work? If in New York, the subterranean task is to supplement the radical responsibility-shaped hole in the education of the dispenser of rights through literary reading, and making use of the Humanities, what about the education of those whose wrongs are righted?

Some assumptions must first be laid aside. The permeability of global culture must be seen as restricted. There is a lack of communication between and among the immense heterogeneity of the subaltern cultures of the world. Cultural borders are easily crossed from the superficial cultural relativism of metropolitan countries, whereas, going the other way, the so-called peripheral countries encounter bureaucratic and policed frontiers. The frontiers of subaltern cultures, which developed no generative public role, have no channels of interpenetration. Here, too, the problem is not solved in a lasting way by the inclusion of exceptional subalterns in South-based global movements with leadership drawn from the descendants of colonial subjects, even as these networks network. These figures are no longer representative of the subaltern stratum in general. [...]

We must question the assumption that, if the sense of doing for the other is not produced on call from a sense of the self as sovereign, packaged with the sense of being fittest, the alternative assumption, romantic or expedient, of an essence of subalternity as the source of such a sense, denies the depradations of history. [...] We must be on guard against subalternist essentialism, both positive and negative. If the self-permission for continuing to right wrongs is premised implicitly on the former  $-$  they will never be  $\frac{1}{2}$  able to help themselves – the latter nourishes false hopes that will as surely be dashed and lead to the same result: an unwilling conclusion that they must always be propped up. Indeed, in the present state of the world, or perhaps always and everywhere, simply harnessing responsibility for accountability in the South, checking up on other directedness, as it were, without the persistent training, of 'no guarantees,' we reproduce and consolidate what can only be called 'feudalism,' where a benevolent despot like Lee Kuan Yew can claim collectivity rather than individualism when expedient. [..]

Declarations like the Bangkok NGO Declaration, entitled 'Our Voice,' and cataloging what 'their right to self-determination' would be for 'Indigenous People in general', <sup>15</sup> may, like many UN Declarations, be an excellent tool for political maneuvering, but it will not touch the entire spectrum of Asian aboriginals, each group as culturally absolutist as the rural audience at the biodiversity festival. In order to make the political maneuverings open to the ethical, we must think the supplementation toward which we are now moving. […]

Subordinate cultures of responsibility – a heuristic generalization as precarious as generalizations about the dominant culture – base the agency of responsibility in that outside of the self that is also in the self, half-archived and therefore not directly accessible. I use the word subordinate here because, as I have been arguing throughout this chapter, they are the recipients of human rights bounty, which I see as 'the burden of the fittest,' and which, as I insist from the first page on down, has the ambivalent structure of enabling violation that anyone of goodwill associates with the white man's burden. I will rely on this argument for this second part of my chapter, which concerns itself with the different way in to the damaged episteme.

[…] I am asking readers to shift their perception from the anthropological to the historico-political and see the same knit textile as a torn cultural fabric in terms of its removal from the dominant loom in a historical moment. That is what it means to be a subaltern. My point so far has been that, for a long time now, these cultural scripts have not been allowed to work except as a delegitimized form forcibly out of touch with the dominant through a history that has taken capital and empire as telos. My generalization is therefore precarious, though demonstrable if the effort I go on to describe is shared. These concept-metaphors, of suturing a torn fabric, of recoding a delegitimized cultural formation, are crucial to the entire second half of my argument.

Subordinate cultures of responsibility, then, base the agency of responsibility in that outside of the self that is also in the self, half-archived and therefore not directly accessible. Such a sentence may seem opaque to (Christianized) secularists who imagine ethics as internalized imperatives; they may seem silly to the ordinary language tradition that must resolutely ignore the parts of the mind not accessible to reason in order to theorize. It may be useful to think of the archived exteriority, in terms of your unmediated knowledge, of the inside of your body. The general premise of the Oxford Amnesty series the Genetic Revolution and Human Rights, for example, was that genes are digitalized words that are driving our bodies, our selves (Burley 1999). Yet they are inaccessible to us as objects and instruments of knowledge, insofar as we are sentient beings. Think also of our creative invention in the languages that we know well. The languages have histories before us, and futures after us. They are outside us, in grammar books and dictionaries. Yet the languages that we know and make in are also us, and in us. These are analogies for agency that is out of us but in us – and, like all analogies, imperfect, but I hope they will suffice for now. In responsibility-based subordinate cultures the volatile space of responsibility can be grasped through these analogies, perhaps.

These […] analogies […] work in the following way: if we can grasp that all human beings are genetically written before will; and if we can grasp that all human children access a language that is 'outside,' as mother-tongue; then, on these structural models, we might grasp the assumption that the human being is human in answer to an 'outside call.' We can grasp the structure of the role of alterity at work in subordinate cultures, by way of these analogies. The word before in 'before the will' is here used to mean logical and chronological priority as well as 'in front of.' The difference is historical, not essential. It is because I believe that right/responsibility can be shared by everyone in the persistent mode of 'to come' that I keep insisting on supplemental pedagogy, on both sides.

In its structure, the definitive predication of being-human by alterity is not with reference to an empirical outside world. Just as I cannot play with my own genes or access the entire linguisticity of my mother tongue, so 'is' the presumed alterity radical in the general sense. Of course it bleeds into the narrow sense of 'accountability to the outside world,' but its anchor is in that imagined alterity that is inaccessible, often transcendentalized and formalized (as indeed is natural freedom in the rights camp).

I need not be more specific here. The subordinate subaltern is as diversified as the recipients of Human Rights activity. I need not make too many distinctions. For they are tied by a Universal Declaration. [...]

I am suggesting that human rights activism should be supplemented by an education that should suture the habits of democracy onto the earlier cultural formation. [...] I think that the real effort should be to access and activate the tribals' indigenous 'democratic' structures to *parliamentary* democracy by patient and sustained efforts to learn to learn from below. *Activate* is the key word here. There is no tight cultural fabric (as opposed to group solidarity) among these disenfranchised groups after centuries of oppression and neglect. Anthropological excavation for description is not the goal here. (I remain suspicious of academic golden-agism from the colonial subject.) I am not able to give scholarly information. Working hands-on with teachers and students over long periods of time on their own terms without thinking of producing information for my academic peers is like learning a language 'to be able to produce in it freely ... [and therefore] to move in it without remembering back to the language rooted and planted in [me, indeed] forgetting it' (Marx 1973: 147; translation modified). [...]

Even if the immense labor of follow-up investigation on a case-by-case basis is streamlined in our era of telecommunication, it will not change the epistemic structure of the dysfunctional responsibility-based community, upon whom rights have been thrust from above. It will neither alleviate the reign of terror nor undo the pattern of dependency. The recipient of human rights bounty [...], an agent of counterterrorism and litigious blackmail at the grassroots, will continue not to resemble the ego ideal implied by the Enlightenment and the UDHR. As long as real equalization through recovering and training the long-ignored ethical imagination of the rural poor and indeed, all species of subproletarians on their own terms  $-$  is not part of the agenda to come, she or he has no chance of becoming the subject of human rights as part of a collectivity, but must remain, forever, its object of benevolence. We will forever hear in the news, local to global, how these people cannot manage when they are left to manage on their own, and the new imperialism, with an at best embarrassed social Darwinist base, will get its permanent sanction.

The seventh article of the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen, following eighteenth century European radical thought, says that 'the law is an expression of the will of the community' (Paine 1992: 79). Among the rural poor of the global South, one may attempt, through that species of education without guarantees, to bring about a situation where the law can be imagined as the expression of a community, always to come. Otherwise the spirit of human rights law is completely out of their unmediated reach. The training in 'literary reading' in the metropolis is here practiced, if you like, in order to produce a situation, in the mode of 'to come,' where it can be acknowledged that 'reciprocally recognized rating [to acknowledge a corresponding

integrity in the other] is a condition without which no civil undertaking is possible' (Sacksteder 1988: 103).

The supplementary method that I will go on to outline does not suggest that human rights interventions should stop. It does not even offer the impractical suggestion that the human rights activists themselves should take time to learn this method. Given the number of wrongs all the world over, those who right them must be impatient. I am making the practical suggestion for certain kinds of humanities teachers, here and there, diasporics wishing to undo the delinking with the global South represented by impatient benevolence, second-generation colonial subjects dissatisfied by the divided postcolonial polity. Only, whoever it is must have the patience and perseverance to learn well one of the languages of the rural poor of the South. This, I hope, will set them apart from the implicit connection between world governance and the self-styled international civil society.

One of the languages. For the purposes of the essential and possible work of righting wrongs – the political calculus – the great European languages are sufficient. But for access to the subaltern episteme to devise a suturing pedagogy, you must take into account the multiplicity of subaltern languages.

This is because the task of the educator is to learn to learn from below, the lines of conflict resolution undoubtedly available, however dormant, within the disenfranchised cultural system; giving up convictions of triumphalist superiority. It is because of the linguistic restriction that one is obliged to speak of just the groups one works for; but, in the hope that these words will be read by some who are interested in comparable work elsewhere, I am always pushing for generalization. The trainer of teachers will find the system dysfunctional and corrupted, mired in ritual, like a clear pond choked with scum. For their cultural axiomatics as well as their already subordinated position did not translate into the emergence of nascent capitalism. We are now teaching our children in the North, and no doubt in the North of the South, that to learn the movement of finance capital is to learn social responsibility. It is in the remote origins of this conviction – that capitalism is responsibility – that we might locate the beginning of the failure of the aboriginal groups of the kind I am describing: their entry into (a distancing from) modernity as a gradual slipping into atrophy.<sup>16</sup>

This history breeds the need for activating an ethical imperative atrophied by gradual distancing from the narrative of progress – colonialism/capitalism. This is the argument about cultural suturing, learning from below to supplement with the possibility of the subjectship of rights.<sup>17</sup>

Now I go back to my broader argument – a new pedagogy. The national education systems are pretty hopeless at this level because they are the detritus of the postcolonial state, the colonial system turned to rote, unproductive of felicitous colonial subjects like ourselves, at home or abroad. This is part of what started the rotting of the cultural fabric of which I speak. Therefore, I am not just asking that they should have 'the kind of education we have had.' The need for supplementing metropolitan education – 'the kind of education we have had' – is something I am involved in every day in my salaried work. And when I say 'rote,' I am not speaking of the fact that a student might swot as a quick way to do well in an exam. I am speaking of the scandal that, in the global South, in the schools for middle-class children and above, the felicitous primary use of a page of language is to understand it; but in the schools for the poor, it is to spell and memorize. […]

The teachers on this ground level at which we work tend to be the least successful products of a bad system. Our educator must learn to train teachers by attending to the children. It is through learning how to take children's response to teaching as our teaching text that we can hope to put ourselves in the way of 'activating' democratic structures. [...]

The effort at education that I am describing [...] hopes against hope that a permanent sanction of the social Darwinism - 'the burden of the fittest' - implicit in the Human Rights agenda will, perhaps, be halted if the threads of the torn cultural fabric are teased out by the uncanny patience of which the Humanities are capable at their best, for the 'activation' of dormant structures.

Indeed, this is the 'Humanities component,' attending upon the object of investigation as other, in all labor. Here is the definitive moment of a Humanities 'to come,' in the service of a Human Rights, that persistently undoes the asymmetry in our title 'Human Rights, Human Wrongs' by the uncoercive rearrangement of desires in terms of the teaching text described earlier in this chapter. [...]

To suture thus the torn and weak responsibility-based system into a conception of human dignity as the enjoyment of rights one enters ritual practice transgressively, alas, as a hacker enters software. The description of ritual-hacking may seem silly, perhaps. But put yourself on the long road where you *can* try it, and you will respect us  $-$  you will not dismiss as 'nothing but' this or that approach on paper. Insofar as this hacking is like a weaving, this, too, is an exercise in *texere*, textil-ity, text-ing, textuality. I must continue to repeat that my emphasis is on the difficulties of this texting, the practical pedagogy of it, not in devising the most foolproof theory of it for you, my peers. Without the iterative text of doing and devising in silence, the description seems either murky or banal.

Subordinate cultural systems are creative in the invention of ritual in order to keep a certain hierarchical order functioning. With the help of the children and the community, the trainer must imagine the task of recoding the ritual-to-order habits of the earlier system with the ritual-to-order habits of parliamentary democracy, with a teaching corps whose idea of education is unfortunately produced by a terrible system. One learns active ritual as one learns manners. The best example for the readership of this anthology might be the 'wild anthropology' of the adult metropolitan migrant, learning a dominant culture on the run, giving as little away as possible. The difference here is that we learn from the vulnerable archaic (Raymond Williams's word captures the predicament better than the anthropological *primitive*), but also without giving much away. The point is to realize that democracy also has its rituals, exaggerated or made visible, for example, when in our metropolitan life we seek to make politically correct manners 'natural,' a matter of reflex.

[...] I will not be able to produce anthropologically satisfying general descriptions here because no trainer can provide satisfactory descriptions of the grammar of a language that s/he is learning painfully. This is the distinction I want to convey. [...] What follows must remain hortatory  $-$  an appeal to your imagination until we meet in the field of specific practice, here or there. Of course we all know, with appropriate cynicism, that this probably will not be. But a ceremonial lecture allows you to tilt at windmills, to insist that such practice is the only way that one can hope to supplement the work of human rights litigation in order to produce cultural entry into modernity.

Fine, you will say, maybe Human Rights interventions do not have the time to engage in this kind of patient education, but there are state-sponsored systems, NGOs, and activists engaging in educational initiatives, surely? The NGO drives count school buildings and teacher bodies. The national attempts also do so, but only at best.

Activists, who care about education in the abstract and are critical of the system, talk rights, talk resistance, even talk nationalism. But instilling habits in very young minds is like writing on soft cement. Repeating slogans, even good slogans, is not the way to go, alas. It breeds fascists just as easily. UNESCO's teaching guides for Human Rights are not helpful as guides.

Some activists attempt to instill pride, in these long-disenfranchised groups, in a pseudohistorical narrative. This type of 'civilizationism' is good for gesture politics and breeding leaders, but does little for the development of democratic reflexes.<sup>18</sup> These pseudohistories are assimilated into the aetiological mythologies of the Aboriginals without epistemic change. Given subaltern ethnic divisions, our teaching also proceeds in the conviction that, if identitarianism is generally bad news here, it is also generally bad news there. [...]

My project seems to have defined itself as the most ground-level task for the breaking of the production and continuation of class apartheid. I now understand why, in Marx's world, Marx had come down to something as simple as the shortening of the working day as 'the grounding condition [*die Grundbedingung*]' when he was speaking of such grand topics as the Realm of Freedom and the Realm of Necessity (Marx, *Capital* 3: 959; translation modified). [...]

I am often reprimanded for writing incomprehensibly. There is no one to complain about the jargon-ridden incomprehensibility of children's textbooks in this subaltern world. If I want you to understand the complete opacity of that absurd history lesson about 'National Liberation Struggles in Many Countries,' devised by some state functionary at the Ministry of Education, for example, I would have to take most of you through an intensive Bengali lesson so that you are able to assess different levels of the language. Without venturing up to that perilous necessity, I will simply recapitulate: first, the culture of responsibility is corrupted. The effort is to learn it with patience from below and to keep trying to suture it to the imagined felicitous subject of universal human rights. Second, the education system is a corrupt ruin of the colonial model. The effort is persistently to undo it, to teach the habit of democratic civility. Third, to teach these habits, with responsibility to the corrupted culture, is different from children's indoctrination into nationalism, resistance-talk, identitarianism.

I leave this chapter with the sense that the material about the rural teaching is not in the acceptable mode of information retrieval. The difficulty is in the discontinuous divide between those who right wrongs and those who are wronged. [...]

I am so irreligious that atheism seems a religion to me. But I now understand why fundamentalists of all kinds have succeeded best in the teaching of the poor  $-$  for the greater glory of God. One needs some sort of 'licensed lunacy' (Orlando Patterson's phrase) from some transcendental Other to develop the sort of ruthless commitment that can undermine the sense that one is better than those who are being helped, that the ability to manage a complicated life support system is the same as being civilized. But I am influenced by deconstruction and for me, radical alterity cannot be named 'God,' in any language. Indeed, the name of 'man' in 'human' rights (or the name of 'woman' in 'women's rights are human rights') will continue to trouble me.

'Licensed lunacy in the name of the unnamable other,' then. It took me this long to explain this incomprehensible phrase. Yet the efforts I have described may be the only recourse for a future to come when the reasonable righting of wrongs will not inevitably be the manifest destiny of groups that remain poised to right them; when wrongs will not proliferate with unsurprising regularity.