South American free-trade agreement

The **Andean Community** (_Spanish: _Comunidad Andina_ de Naciones_, CAN) is
an international organization in South America. It consists of the member
states Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador and Peru and aims at the economic, political
and social integration of these states.

CAN is also a free trade area with the objective of creating a customs union
comprising the South American countries. The organization was called the
**Andean Pact** (_Pacto Andino_) until 1996 and came into existence when the
**Cartagena Agreement** was signed in 1969. Since the reform by the Trujillo
Protocol of 1997 it called _Comunidad Andina de Naciones_. Its headquarters
are in Lima, Peru.

The Andean Community has 113 million inhabitants over an area of approximately
3,800,000 km2. Its GDP has gone up to US$745.300 billion in 2005, including
Venezuela, which was a member at the time. Its estimated PPP of GDP for 2011
amounts to US$902.86 billion, excluding Venezuela.

The supranational characteristics of CAN are the reason why the Andean
Community is considered the most robust subregional organization in Latin
America and the Caribbean.

## Cartagena Agreement of 1969

The Cartagena Agreement of 26 May 1969 is the legal basis of the Andean legal
order, a supranational legal order modeled on European Community law.

Although characterized by greater intergovernmentalism, the Andean Community
is clearly modeled on the European Union in its basic elements. The Community
is empowered to adopt its own legal acts, which are directly applicable in the
member states and can grant individual rights without the need for further
ratification. Furthermore, Andean Community law takes precedence over national
law. These supranational characteristics of the Community are the reason why
the Andean Community is considered the most robust subregional organization in
Latin America and the Caribbean.

The Member States drafted a treaty establishing the Andean Court of Justice
(AGHV), which in its legal effects is partly similar to an additional protocol
to the AC.

## History

Member states

The original Andean Pact was founded in 1969 by Bolivia, Chile, Colombia,
Ecuador, and Peru. In 1973 the pact gained its sixth member, Venezuela. In
1976 however, its membership was again reduced to five when Chile withdrew.
Venezuela announced its withdrawal in 2006, reducing the Andean Community to
four member states.

With the new cooperation agreement with Mercosur, the Andean Community gained
four new associate members: Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, and Uruguay. These
four Mercosur members were granted associate membership by the Andean Council
of Foreign Ministers meeting in an enlarged session with the Commission (of
the Andean Community) on 7 July 2005. This moves reciprocates the actions of
Mercosur which granted associate membership to all the Andean Community
nations by virtue of the Economic Complementarity Agreements (Free Trade
agreements) signed between the CAN and individual Mercosur members.

Evgeny Morozov argues that the original Andean Pact was motivated in part by a
pursuit of technological sovereignty and independence from partnerships with
American technology companies.

## Chronology

Secretariat of the Andean Community in Lima

  * The groundwork for the Community was established in 1969 in the Cartagena Agreement, signed May 26th.
  * In 1973, Venezuela joins the Andean Pact.
  * In 1976, Augusto Pinochet withdrew Chile from the Andean Pact claiming economic incompatibilities.
  * In 1979, the treaty creating the Court of Justice was signed, and the Andean Parliament which in principle was located in Lima, increated and the Andean Council of Foreign Ministers were created.
  * In 1981 the Andean Parliament moves to Bogotá.
  * In 1983, the treaty creating the Court of Justice entered into effect
  * In 1991, the presidents approved the open skies policy and agree to intensify integration
  * In 1992, Peru temporarily suspended its obligations under the Liberalization Program
  * In 1993, the Free Trade Zone entered into full operation for Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador, and Venezuela
  * In 1994, the Common External Tariff was approved
  * In 1996, the Cartagena Agreement Commission approved the regulatory context for the establishment, operation, and exploitation of the Simón Bolívar Satellite System
  * In March 1996, through the Trujillo Protocol, institutional reforms were introduced: The Andean Community was created and the Andean Integration System was established.
  * In 1997, an agreement was reached for Peru's gradual incorporation into the Andean Free Trade Zone
  * In 1998, the Framework Agreement for the creation of a Free Trade Area between the Andean Community and the Mercosur was signed in Buenos Aires
  * In 2000, a meeting of the South American Presidents, at which the Andean Community Heads of State and Mercosur decide to launch negotiations for establishing a free trade area between the two blocs as rapidly as possible and by January 2002 at the latest
  * In August 2003, the Andean Community and Mercosur Foreign Ministers, during a meeting in Montevideo at which the CAN delivered a working proposal containing guidelines for the negotiation, reaffirmed their governments' political determination to move ahead with the negotiation of a free trade agreement between the two blocs
  * In April 2006 President Hugo Chávez announced that Venezuela would withdraw from the Andean Community, claiming the FTA agreements signed by Colombia and Peru with the United States caused irreparable damage to the community
  * On 23 March 2017, a Memorandum of Understanding was signed between the Andean Community and the Eurasian Economic Union
  * On 21 February 2020, disputed interim president of Venezuela Juan Guaidó announced Venezuela's reentry into CAN
  * The trade agreement between the European Union and the Andean countries of Colombia, Peru, and Ecuador entered into full force in 2024. The agreement covers the areas of services, intellectual property, and public procurement.

## Membership

  * Current members: 
    * Bolivia (1969)
    * Colombia (1969)
    * Peru (1969)
    * Ecuador (1969)
  * Associate members: 
    * Argentina (2005)
    * Brazil (2005)
    * Paraguay (2005)
    * Uruguay (2005)
    * Chile (2006)
  * Observer countries: 
    * Spain
    * Morocco
    * Turkey
    * Greece
  * Former full members: 
    * Venezuela (1973–2006), joined Mercosur
    * Chile (full member 1969–1976, observer 1976–2006, associate member since 2006)

## Relationship with other organizations

| This article needs to be **updated**. Please help update this article to
reflect recent events or newly available information. _( June 2022)_  
---|---  
A clickable Euler diagram showing the relationships between various
multinational organizations in the Americas

  * v
  * t
  * e

The Andean Community and Mercosur comprise the two main trading blocs of South
America. In 1999, these organizations began negotiating a merger with a view
to creating a "South American Free Trade Area" (SAFTA). On 8 December 2004,
the Andean Community (CAN) signed a cooperation agreement with Mercosur and
they published a joint letter of intention for future negotiations towards
integrating all of South America in a Union of South American Nations (USAN),
patterned after the European Union.

During 2005, Venezuela decided to join Mercosur. Venezuela's official position
first appeared to be that, by joining Mercosur, further steps could be taken
towards integrating both trade blocs.[_citation needed_] CAN Secretary General
Allan Wagner stated that the Venezuelan Foreign Minister Alí Rodríguez had
declared that Venezuela did not intend to leave the CAN, and its simultaneous
membership to both blocs marked the beginning of their integration.

However some analysts interpreted that Venezuela might eventually leave the
CAN in the process. As Colombia and Peru signed free trade agreements with the
United States, in protest the Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez indeed
announced in April 2006 his country's withdrawal from the CAN, stating that
the Community is "dead". Officials in Colombia and Peru expressed their
disagreement with this view, as did representatives from Venezuela's
industrial sector (Conindustria).

In spite of this announcement, Venezuela still had not formally completed all
the necessary withdrawal procedures. According to Venezuela's Commerce
Minister María Cristina Iglesias, the entire process was going to take up five
years. Until then, Venezuela and its partners would remain bound by the
effects of the community's preexisting commercial agreements.

Exclusive Economic Zones of the member states of the Andean Community.
Considering them, the total area of the Andean Community is 6 573 757 km2.

During a visit to Colombia in August 2007, President Hugo Chávez was asked by
the presidents of Ecuador and Bolivia to rejoin the Andean Community, and he
responded that he would agree.[_citation needed_] Meanwhile, at that time the
Mercosur's relations with Venezuela were weakening as Mercosur was not
agreeing with some of the Hugo Chávez's proposals.

Eventually Venezuela achieved the full membership of the Mercosur in 2012,
making the Mercosur bigger in number of members than the CAN for the first
time.

In addition to CAN, Bolivia is also a member of the WTO, UNASUR, and ALBA. Its
attitude is considered crucial to relations between UNASUR and ALBA
specifically, says Marion Hörmann, since Bolivia is traditionally seen as a
mediator between the Andean countries and the rest of South America.

Furthermore, on 7 December 2012, the Bolivian nation was accepted by the
Mercosur countries to start the incorporation protocols to achieve the
Mercosur full membership in a matter of 4 years, receiving the proclamation of
an _accessing member_ , and further consolidating itself as a strategic
geopolitical nation.

  * 

## Organization

  * Andean Presidential Council
  * Andean Foreign Relations Ministers Council (Lima, Peru)
  * Commission (Lima, Peru)
  * Headquarters (Lima, Peru)
  * Andean Court of Justice (Quito, Ecuador)
  * Andean Parliament (Bogotá, Colombia)
  * Latin American Reserve Fund (Bogotá, Colombia and Lima, Peru)
  * Simón Bolívar Andean University (Sucre, Bolivia and Quito, Ecuador)
  * Andean Health Organization (Lima, Peru)
  * CAF – Development Bank of Latin America and the Caribbean (Caracas, Venezuela)

## Secretaries-General

  * Sebastián Alegrett (Venezuela) 1997–2002
  * Guillermo Fernández de Soto (Colombia) 2002–2004
  * Edward Allan Wagner Tizón (Peru) 2004–2006
  * Alfredo Fuentes Hernández (Colombia), interim 2006–2007
  * Freddy Ehlers (Ecuador), 2007–2010
  * Adalid Contreras Baspineiro (Bolivia), interim 2010–2011, 2011–2013
  * Pablo Guzmán Laugier (Bolivia), 2013–2016 
  * Walker San Miguel (Bolivia), 2016–present 

## Free flow of people

Since 1 January 2005, the citizens of the member countries can enter the other
Andean Community member states without the requirement of a visa. Travellers
should present the authorities their national ID cards.

Visitors to Venezuela will have to present their passports; they will then
receive the Andean Migration Card (_Tarjeta Andina de Migración_), in which
the time of temporary residence in the country is stated.

### Andean passport

The Andean passport was created in June 2001 pursuant to _Decisión 504_. This
stipulates the issuing of a passport based on a standard model which contains
harmonised features of nomenclature and security. The passport is effective in
Ecuador, Peru, Venezuela and Bolivia (Bolivia since early 2006).

## Literature

  * Sánchez, M.J., 2025. Andean Community (CAN). In _The Economics of Regional Integration_ (pp. 223-248). Routledge.