Trade agreement among North African Arab countries of the Maghreb

This article is part of a series on  
---  
Politics of the African Union  
Institutions

  * Casablanca Group
  * Union of African States
  * Organisation of African Unity
  * African Economic Community
  * African Unification Front

  
Executive

  * Assembly
    * Chairperson
  * Commission
    * Chairperson
    * Conference and Events
    * Peace & Sec.
    * Pol. Affairs
    * Infra. & Energy
    * Soc. Affairs
    * HR, Sci., & Tech.
    * Trade and Industry
    * Rural Econ. & Agri.
    * Economic
    * Legal Counsel
  * Executive Council
    * Rep. Committee

  
Legislature

  * Pan-African Parliament
    * President (Fortune Z. Charumbira)
    * Bureau
    * Secretariat
    * List of members
  * Permanent Committees
    * Rural Econ., Agri., Resources, Environ.
    * Monetary & Financial
    * Trade, Customs, & Immigration
    * Cooperation, IR, & Conflict
    * Transport, Industry, Communication,   
Energy, Science, & Tech.

    * Health, Labour, & Social
    * Educ., Culture, Tourism, & HR
    * Gender, Family, Youth, Disabilities
    * Justice & Rights
    * Rules, Privileges, & Discipline
    * Committee on Audit and Public Accounts (CAPA)

  
Judiciary

  * Sirte Declaration
  * Constitutive Act of the AU
  * Law
    * Charter on Rights
    * Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights
  * Justice and Human Rights
    * Court of Justice
    * Court on Human and Peoples' Rights
      * List of judges

  
Advisory bodies

  * Peace and Security Council
  * Economic, Social and Cultural Council
  * Specialised Technical Committees
    * Rural Econ., Agri.
    * Monetary & Financial
    * Trade, Customs, and Immigration
    * Industry, Sci. & Tech., Energy, Natural Resources, & Environment
    * Transport, Comm., Tourism
    * Health, Labor, Social
    * Edu., Culture, & Human Resources

  
Financial bodies

  * AEC Pillars (Abuja Treaty) 
    * CEN-SAD
    * COMESA
    * EAC
    * ECCAS/CEEAC
      * CEMAC
    * ECOWAS/CEDEAO
      * UEMOA
      * WAMZ
    * IGAD
    * SADC
      * SACU
    * AMU/UMA
  * African Central Bank
  * African Monetary Union
  * African Investment Bank
  * New Partnership for Africa's Development
    * African Peer Review Mechanism
    * New Partnership for Africa's Development E-School Program

  
Decentralised bodies

  * Agencies of the AU
    * Africa CDC
    * African Space Agency
    * Afripol

  
Related topics

  * Enlargement
  * Foreign relations
  * TerrAfrica partnership

  
  
  * Other countries

  
  
  * v
  * t
  * e

  
  
The **Arab Maghreb Union** (Arabic: إتحاد المغرب العربي __Ittiḥād al-Maghrib
al-‘Arabī__ ; **AMU** /**UMA**) is a political union and economic union trade
agreement aiming for economic and future political unity among Arab countries
that are located primarily in the Maghreb in North Africa. Its members are the
nations of Algeria, Libya, Mauritania, Morocco and Tunisia. The Union has been
unable to achieve tangible progress on its goals due to deep economic and
political disagreements between Morocco and Algeria regarding, among others,
the issue of Western Sahara. No high-level meetings have taken place since 3
July 2008, and commentators regard the Union as largely dormant.

## Creation

The idea for an economic union of the Maghreb began with the independence of
Tunisia and Morocco in 1956. It was not until thirty years later, though, that
five Maghreb states—Algeria, Libya, Mauritania, Morocco, and Tunisia—met for
the first Maghreb summit in 1988. The Union was established on 17 February
1989 when the treaty was signed by the member states in Marrakech. According
to the Constitutive Act, its aim is to guarantee cooperation "with similar
regional institutions... [to] take part in the enrichment of the international
dialogue... [to] reinforce the independence of the member states and... [to]
safeguard... their assets." Strategic relevance of the region is based on the
fact that, collectively, it boasts large phosphate, oil, and gas reserves, and
it is a transit centre to southern Europe. The success of the Union would,
therefore, be economically important.

## Organization

There is a rotating chairmanship within the AMU which is held in turn by each
nation. The current Secretary-General is the Tunisian Taïeb Baccouche.

## Members

During the 16th session of the AMU Foreign Ministers, held on 12 November 1994
in Algiers, Egypt applied to join the AMU grouping.

  * Algeria
  * Libya
  * Mauritania
  * Morocco
  * Tunisia

## Economy

The economy of the AMU combines the economies of four out of five member
states.[_clarification needed_] All countries are predominantly Arab and
Muslim states. The four out of five AMU countries have a combined GDP (at
purchasing power parity; PPP) of US$1.5276 trillion.[_when?_] The richest
country on the basis of GDP per capita at PPP is Algeria. On the basis of per
capita GDP (nominal), Libya is the richest country, with incomes exceeding
US$65.803 per capita.[_clarification needed_]

Economies of AMU members  Country  | GDP (nominal)  | GDP (PPP)  | GDP (nominal) per capita  | GDP (PPP) per capita  | HDI   
---|---|---|---|---|---  
Algeria | 200,171,000,000  | 693,109,000,000  | 4,645  | 16,085  | 0.763   
Libya | 51,330,000,000  | 79,595,000,000  | 7,803  | 12,100  | 0.721   
Mauritania | 5,243,000,000  | 19,472,000,000  | 1,291  | 4,797  | 0.563   
Morocco | 122,458,000,000  | 332,358,000,000  | 3,441  | 9,339  | 0.710   
Tunisia | 42,277,000,000  | 151,566,000,000  | 3,587  | 12,862  | 0.746   
**Arab Maghreb Union** | **421,479,000,000** | **1,276,100,000,000** | **3,720** | **12,628** | **0.700**  
  
## Operations

There have been problems of traditional rivalries within the AMU. For example,
in 1994, Algeria decided to transfer the presidency of the AMU to Libya. This
followed the diplomatic tensions between Algeria and other members, especially
Morocco and Libya, whose leaders continuously refused to attend AMU meetings
held in Algiers. Algerian officials justified the decision, arguing that they
were simply complying with the AMU Constitutive Act, which stipulates that the
presidency should in fact rotate on an annual basis. Algeria agreed to take
over the presidency from Tunisia in 1994, but could not transfer it due to the
absence of all required conditions to relinquish the presidency as stipulated
by the Constitutive Act.

Following the announcement of the decision to transfer the presidency of the
Union, the Libyan leader, Muammar Gaddafi, stated that it was time to put the
Union "in the freezer". This raised questions about Libya's position towards
the Union. The concern was that Libya would have a negative influence on the
manner in which it would preside over the organization.

Moreover, traditional rivalries between Morocco and Algeria, and the unsolved
question of Western Sahara's sovereignty, have blocked union meetings since
the early 1990s despite several attempts to re-launch the political process.
Western Sahara, a former Spanish colony that was invaded by Morocco and
Mauritania, has declared independence as the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic.
The latest top-level conference, in mid-2005, was derailed by Morocco's
refusal to meet, due to Algeria's vocal support for Sahrawi independence.
Algeria has continuously supported the Polisario Front liberation movement.

Several attempts have been made, notably by the United Nations, to resolve the
Western Sahara issue. In mid-2003, the UN Secretary General's Personal Envoy,
James Baker, proposed a settlement plan, also referred to as the Baker Plan
II. The UN's proposal was rejected by Morocco and accepted by the Sahrawi Arab
Democratic Republic. As far as bilateral attempts are concerned, very little
has been achieved, as Morocco continues to refuse any concessions that would
allow the independence of Western Sahara, while Algeria maintains its support
for the self-determination of the Sahrawis.

In addition, the quarrel between Gaddafi's Libya and Mauritania has not made
the task of reinvigorating the organization any easier. Mauritania has accused
the Libyan secret service of being involved in a 2003 attempted coup against
President Maaouya Ould Sid'Ahmed Taya. Libya has denied all the accusation.

In 2023, the single currency project in the area remains technically feasible
but politically infeasible.

In April 2024, Algeria, Tunisia, and Libya discuss the establishment of a new
North African entity, supposed to replace the Arab Maghreb Union, which they
consider "inoperative", without Morocco, and Mauritania. It was decided that
joint working groups will be created to coordinate efforts on the security of
common borders in the face of irregular migration and the establishment of
major joint investment projects on cereal production as well as water
desalination of sea water in the face of climate change, and the free movement
of goods and people between the three countries.

In November 2024, Algerian president Abdelmadjid Tebboune invited Kais Saied,
President of Tunisia, Mohamed Ould Ghazouani, President of Mauritania, Mohamed
al-Menfi, President of the Libyan Presidential Council, and Ibrahim Ghali,
President of the Sahrawi Republic, to attend the celebration of the 70th
anniversary of the outbreak of the Declaration of 1 November 1954. This
meeting is seen as the beginning of a new union with the notable absence of
Morocco and Mauritania.

A third tripartite summit between Tunisia, Libya, and Algeria is being held in
Tripoli in January 2025.