Western European politico-economic union

The **Benelux Union** (Dutch: _Benelux Unie_ ; French: _Union Benelux_ ;
German: _Benelux-Union_ ; Luxembourgish: _Benelux-Unioun_) or **Benelux** is a
politico-economic union, alliance and formal international intergovernmental
cooperation of three neighbouring states in Western Europe: Belgium, the
Netherlands, and Luxembourg. The name is a portmanteau formed from joining the
first few letters of each country's name and was first used to name the
customs agreement that initiated the union (signed in 1944). It is now used
more generally to refer to the geographic, economic, and cultural grouping of
the three countries.

The Benelux is an economically dynamic and densely populated region, with 5.6%
of the European population (29.55 million residents) and 7.9% of the joint EU
GDP (€36,000/resident) on 1.7% of the whole surface of the EU. In 2015, 37% of
the total number of EU cross-border workers worked in the Benelux; 35,000
Belgian residents work in Luxembourg, while 37,000 others cross the border to
work in the Netherlands each day. In addition, 12,000 Dutch and close to a
thousand Luxembourg residents work in Belgium.

The main institutions of the Union are the Committee of Ministers, the Council
of the Union, the General Secretariat, the Interparliamentary Consultative
Council and the Benelux Court of Justice while the Benelux Office for
Intellectual Property covers the same land but is not part of the Benelux
Union.

The Benelux General Secretariat is located in Brussels. It is the central
platform of the Benelux Union cooperation. It handles the secretariat of the
Committee of Ministers, the Council of Benelux Union and the sundry committees
and working parties. The General Secretariat provides day-to-day support for
the Benelux cooperation on the substantive, procedural, diplomatic and
logistical levels. The Secretary-General is Frans Weekers from the Netherlands
and there are two deputies: Deputy Secretary-General Michel-Etienne Tilemans
from Belgium and Deputy Secretary-General Jean-Claude Meyer from Luxembourg.

The presidency of the Benelux is held in turn by the three countries for a
period of one year. Luxembourg holds the presidency for 2025.

About 80 percent of the Benelux population speaks Dutch, about 20 percent
speaks French and one percent Luxembourgish as their native language. A small
minority under one percent are native German speakers.[_citation needed_]

## History

Meeting of Benelux delegates in The Hague, 1949

In 1944, exiled representatives of the three countries signed the London
Customs Convention, the treaty that established the Benelux Customs Union.
Ratified in 1947, the treaty was in force from 1948 until it was superseded by
the Benelux Economic Union. The initial form of economic cooperation expanded
steadily over time, leading to the signing of the treaty establishing the
Benelux Economic Union (_Benelux Economische Unie_ , _Union Économique
Benelux_) on 3 February 1958 in The Hague, which came into force on 1 November
1960. Initially, the purpose of cooperation among the three partners was to
put an end to customs barriers at their borders and ensure free movement of
persons, capital, services, and goods between the three countries. This treaty
was the first example of international economic integration in Europe since
the Second World War.

The three countries therefore foreshadowed and provided the model for future
European integration, such as the European Coal and Steel Community, the
European Economic Community (EEC), and the European Community–European Union
(EC–EU). The three partners also launched the Schengen process, which came
into operation in 1985. Benelux cooperation has been constantly adapted and
now goes much further than mere economic cooperation, extending to new and
topical policy areas connected with security, sustainable development, and the
economy.

Belgian Prime Minister Gaston Eyskens, Dutch Prime Minister Piet de Jong, and
Luxembourgish Prime Minister Pierre Werner during a Benelux conference in The
Hague, Netherlands, on 28 April 1968 Dutch Prime Minister Ruud Lubbers,
Luxembourgish Prime Minister Pierre Werner, and Belgian Prime Minister
Wilfried Martens at the Ministry of General Affairs, on 10 November 1982 Dutch
Prime Minister Mark Rutte, Luxembourgish Prime Minister Jean-Claude Juncker,
and Belgian Prime Minister Yves Leterme in The Hague, Netherlands, on 24 May
2011

In 1965, the treaty establishing a Benelux Court of Justice was signed. It
entered into force in 1974. The court, composed of judges from the highest
courts of the three states, has to guarantee the uniform interpretation of
common legal rules. This international judicial institution is located in
Luxembourg.

### Renewal of the agreement

The 1958 Treaty between the Benelux countries establishing the Benelux
Economic Union was limited to a period of 50 years. During the following
years, and even more so after the creation of the European Union, the Benelux
cooperation focused on developing other fields of activity within a constantly
changing international context.

At the end of the 50 years, the governments of the three Benelux countries
decided to renew the agreement, taking into account the new aspects of the
Benelux-cooperation – such as security – and the new federal government
structure of Belgium. The original establishing treaty, set to expire in 2010,
was replaced by a new legal framework (called the Treaty revising the Treaty
establishing the Benelux Economic Union), which was signed on 17 June 2008.

The new treaty has no set time limit and the name of the _Benelux Economic
Union_ changed to _Benelux Union_ to reflect the broad scope on the union. The
main objectives of the treaty are the continuation and enlargement of the
cooperation between the three member states within a larger European context.
The renewed treaty explicitly foresees the possibility that the Benelux
countries will cooperate with other European member states or with regional
cooperation structures. The new Benelux cooperation focuses on three main
topics: internal market and economic union, sustainability, justice and
internal affairs. The number of structures in the renewed Treaty has been
reduced and thus simplified.

### Benefits of the Benelux cooperation

  1. **Security and emergency services**
     * Thanks to the Benelux Police Treaty (2023), police forces can operate across borders, strengthening the fight against crime.
     * Ambulances and fire services can operate across borders, ensuring faster response times in emergencies.
  2. **Recognition of diplomas**
     * Higher education diplomas are automatically recognized within the Benelux, making it easier to work and study in another Benelux country. This prevents extra administrative costs and time loss.
  3. **Economy and transport**
     * The removal of administrative barriers, such as with digital freight documents, makes cross-border transport more efficient and cost-effective for businesses.
  4. **Sustainability**
     * The Benelux countries cooperate on energy transition and the circular economy, contributing to a sustainable and future-proof region.

The Benelux Union also serves as a testing ground for European cooperation.
Initiatives such as diploma recognition and cross-border truck inspections set
an example for further European harmonization.

## Benelux pilot projects 2025

### Activities since 2008

Benelux seeks region-to-region cooperation, be it with France and Germany
(North Rhine-Westphalia) or beyond with the Baltic States, the Nordic Council,
the Visegrad countries, or even further. In 2018, a renewed political
declaration was adopted between Benelux and North Rhine-Westphalia to give
cooperation a further impetus.

The Benelux is particularly active in the field of intellectual property. The
three countries established a Benelux Trademarks Office and a Benelux Designs
Office, both situated in The Hague. In 2005, they concluded a treaty
establishing the Benelux Office for Intellectual Property, which replaced both
offices upon its entry into force on 1 September 2006. This organisation is
the official body for the registration of trademarks and designs in the
Benelux. In addition, it offers the possibility to formally record the
existence of ideas, concepts, designs, prototypes and the like.

Some examples of recent Benelux initiatives include: automatic level
recognition of diplomas and degrees within the Benelux for bachelor's and
master's programs in 2015, and for all other degrees in 2018; common road
inspections in 2014; and a Benelux pilot with digital consignment notes
(e-CMR) in 2017;[_citation needed_] a new Benelux Treaty on Police Cooperation
in 2018, providing for direct access to each other's police databases and
population registers within the limits of national legislation, and allowing
some police forces to cross borders in some situations. The Benelux is also
committed to working together on adaptation to climate change. A joint
political declaration in July 2020 called on the European Commission to
prioritise cycling in European climate policy and Sustainable Transport
strategies, to co-finance the construction of cycling infrastructure, and to
provide funds to stimulate cycling policy.

On 5 June 2018, the Benelux Treaty celebrated its 60 years of existence. In
2018, a Benelux Youth Parliament was created.[_citation needed_]

In addition to cooperation based on a Treaty, there is also political
cooperation in the Benelux context, including summits of the Benelux
government leaders. In 2019 a Benelux summit was held in Luxembourg. In 2020,
a Benelux summit was held – online, due to the COVID-19 pandemic – under Dutch
Presidency on 7 October between the prime ministers.

As of 1 January 2017, a new arrangement for NATO Air Policing started for the
airspace of Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxemburg (Benelux). The Belgian Air
Component and the Royal Netherlands Air Force will take four-month turns to
ensure that Quick Reaction Alert (QRA) fighter jets are available at all times
to be launched under NATO control.

### Cooperation with other geopolitical regions

The Benelux countries also work together in the so-called Pentalateral Energy
Forum, a regional cooperation group formed of five members—the Benelux states,
France, Germany, Austria, and Switzerland. Formed on 6 June 2007, the
ministers for energy from the various countries represent a total of 200
million residents and 40% of the European electricity network.

In 2017 the members of the Benelux, the Baltic Assembly, three members of the
Nordic Council (Sweden, Denmark and Finland), and all the other countries EU
member states, sought to increase cooperation in the Digital Single Market, as
well as discussing social matters, the Economic and Monetary Union of the
European Union, immigration and defence cooperation. Foreign relations in the
wake of Russia's annexation of Crimea and the 2017 Turkish constitutional
referendum were also on the agenda.

Since 2008 the Benelux Union works together with the German Land (state) North
Rhine-Westphalia.

In 2018 Benelux Union signed a declaration with France to strengthen cross-
border cooperation.

## Politics

Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg form the Benelux

### Benelux institutions

Under the 2008 treaty there are five Benelux institutions: the Benelux
Committee of Ministers, the Benelux Council, the Benelux Parliament, the
Benelux Court of Justice, the Benelux Secretariat General. Beside these five
institutions, the Benelux Organisation for Intellectual Property is also an
independent organisation.

**Benelux Committee of Ministers:** The Committee of Ministers is the supreme
decision-making body of the Benelux. It includes at least one representative
at ministerial level from the three countries. Its composition varies
according to its agenda. The ministers determine the orientations and
priorities of Benelux cooperation. The presidency of the Committee rotates
between the three countries on an annual basis.

**Benelux Council:** The council is composed of senior officials from the
relevant ministries. Its composition varies according to its agenda. The
council's main task is to prepare the dossiers for the ministers.

**Benelux InterParliamentary Consultative Council:** The Benelux Parliament
(officially referred to as an "Interparliamentary Consultative Council") was
created in 1955. This parliamentary assembly is composed of 49 members from
the respective national parliaments (21 members of the Dutch parliament, 21
members of the Belgian national and regional parliaments, and 7 members of the
Luxembourg parliament). Its members inform and advise their respective
governments on all Benelux matters. On 20 January 2015, the governments of the
three countries, including, as far as Belgium is concerned, the community and
regional governments, signed in Brussels the Treaty of the Benelux
Interparliamentary Assembly. This treaty entered into force on 1 August 2019.
This superseded the 1955 Convention on the Consultative Interparliamentary
Council for the Benelux. The official name has been largely obsolete in daily
practice for a number of years: both internally in the Benelux and in external
references, the name Benelux Parliament has been used _de facto_ for a number
of years now.[_citation needed_]

**Benelux Court of Justice:** The Benelux Court of Justice is an international
court. Its mission is to promote uniformity in the application of Benelux
legislation. When faced with difficulty interpreting a common Benelux legal
rule, national courts must seek an interpretive ruling from the Benelux Court,
which subsequently renders a binding decision[_citation needed_]. The members
of the Court are appointed from among the judges of the 'Cour de cassation' of
Belgium, the 'Hoge Raad of the Netherlands' and the 'Cour de cassation' of
Luxembourg[_citation needed_].

**Benelux General Secretariat:** The General Secretariat, which is based in
Brussels, forms the cooperation platform of the Benelux Union. It acts as the
secretariat of the Committee of Ministers, the council and various commissions
and working groups[_citation needed_]. The General Secretariat has years of
expertise in the area of Benelux cooperation and is familiar with the policy
agreements and differences between the three countries. Building on what
already been achieved, the General Secretariat puts its knowledge, network and
experience at the service of partners and stakeholders who endorse its
mission. It initiates, supports and monitors cooperation results in the areas
of economy, sustainability and security.

The Secretary General of the Benelux is Frans Weekers (NL), the Deputy
Secretary General is Michel-Etienne Tilemans (BE) and Jean-Claude Meyer (LU)

Benelux works together on the basis of an annual plan embedded in a four-year
joint work programme.

### Benelux legal instruments

The Benelux Union involves intergovernmental cooperation.

The Treaty establishing the Benelux Union explicitly provides that the Benelux
Committee of Ministers can resort to four legal instruments (art. 6, paragraph
2, under a), f), g) and h)):

1\. **Decisions**

Decisions are legally binding regulations for implementing the Treaty
establishing the Benelux Union or other Benelux treaties.

Their legally binding force concerns the Benelux states (and their sub-state
entities), which have to implement them. However, they have no direct effect
towards individual citizens or companies (notwithstanding any indirect
protection of their rights based on such decisions as a source of
international law). Only national provisions implementing a decision can
directly create rights and obligations for citizens or companies.

2\. **Agreements**

The Committee of Ministers can draw up agreements, which are then submitted to
the Benelux states (and/or their sub-state entities) for signature and
subsequent parliamentary ratification. These agreements can deal with any
subject matter, also in policy areas that are not yet covered by cooperation
in the framework of the Benelux Union.

These are in fact traditional treaties, with the same direct legally binding
force towards both authorities and citizens or companies. The negotiations do
however take place in the established context of the Benelux working groups
and institutions, rather than on an ad hoc basis.

3\. **Recommendations**

Recommendations are non-binding orientations, adopted at ministerial level,
which underpin the functioning of the Benelux Union. These (policy)
orientations may not be legally binding, but given their adoption at the
highest political level and their legal basis vested directly in the Treaty,
they do entail a strong moral obligation for any authority concerned in the
Benelux countries.

4\. **Directives**

Directives of the Committee of Ministers are mere inter-institutional
instructions towards the Benelux Council and/or the Secretariat-General, for
which they are binding. This instrument has so far only been used
occasionally, basically in order to organize certain activities within a
Benelux working group or to give them impetus.

All four instruments require the unanimous approval of the members of the
Committee of Ministers (and, in the case of agreements, subsequent signature
and ratification at national level).

## Characteristics

### Countries

Benelux Countries Comparison  Country  | Belgium | Netherlands | Luxembourg  
---|---|---|---  
Official name  | 

  * English: Kingdom of Belgium
  * Dutch: Koninkrijk België
  * French: Royaume de Belgique
  * German: Königreich Belgien

|

  * English: Kingdom of the Netherlands
  * Dutch: Koninkrijk der Nederlanden

|

  * English: Grand Duchy of Luxembourg
  * Luxembourgish: Groussherzogtum Lëtzebuerg
  * German: Großherzogtum Luxemburg
  * French: Grand-Duché de Luxembourg

  
Official languages  | 

  * Dutch
  * French
  * German
  * Limburgish (_no formal status_)

|

  * Dutch
  * Frisian
  * Papiamento/Papiamentu
  * Limburgish (regional language)

|

  * Luxembourgish
  * French
  * German

  
Population (2024)  |  11,763,650 |  18,404,800 |  672,050   
Area  | 30,528 km2 (11,787 sq mi) | 41,543 km2 (16,040 sq mi) | 2,586.4 km2 (998.6 sq mi)   
Population density  | 385/km2 (998/sq mi) | 441/km2 (1,141/sq mi) | 260/km2 (673/sq mi)   
Capital city  | Brussels | Amsterdam | Luxembourg City  
Largest urban areas  | 

  * Brussels: 2,500,000
  * Antwerp: 1,200,000
  * Liège: 749,110
  * Ghent: 594,582
  * Charleroi: 522,522

|

  * Amsterdam: 2,480,394
  * Rotterdam: 1,181,284
  * The Hague: 1,054,793
  * Utrecht: 656,342
  * Haarlem: 424,601

|

  * Luxembourg City: 134,714
  * Esch-sur-Alzette: 36,625
  * Differdange: 29,536
  * Dudelange: 22,403
  * Ettelbruck: 9,965

  
Form of government  | Federal parliamentary constitutional monarchy | Unitary parliamentary constitutional monarchy | Unitary parliamentary constitutional monarchy  
Current head of state | King Philippe | King Willem-Alexander | Grand Duke Henri  
Current head of government | Prime Minister Bart de Wever | Prime Minister Dick Schoof | Prime Minister Luc Frieden  
Main religions  | 

  * 49% Christianity
  * 40% no religion
  * 7% Islam
  * 3% other

|

  * 58% no religion
  * 30% Christianity
  * 6% Islam
  * 6% other

|

  * 73.2% Christianity
  * 23.4% no religion
  * 3.2% other

  
GDP nominal (2025)  |  US$689.364 billion |  US$1.273 trillion |  US$96.993 billion   
GDP per capita nominal (2025)  |  US$58,248 |  US$70,606 |  US$141,079   
GDP (PPP) (2025)  |  US$889.833 billion |  US$1.511 trillion |  US$106.505 billion   
GDP per capita (PPP) (2025)  |  US$75,187 |  US$83,823 |  US$154,914   
Currency  | Euro | Euro, also uses USD (in some cases) | Euro