Refers to France, Germany, Italy and the United Kingdom

The **Big Four** , also known as the **E4** or **G4** , refers to France,
Germany, Italy and the United Kingdom. France and the United Kingdom are
official nuclear-weapon states and are permanent members of the United Nations
Security Council with the power of veto, which enables any one of them to
prevent the adoption of any "substantive" draft Council resolution, regardless
of its level of international support. The United Kingdom is the only country
of the Big Four which is not a member state of the European Union, having
ended its membership in 2020, pursuant to a referendum held in 2016. France,
Germany, Italy and the United Kingdom are considered major European powers and
they are the Western European countries individually represented as full
members of the G7 and the G20. They have been referred to as the "Big Four of
Europe" since the interwar period.

The term G4 was used for the first time when French President Nicolas Sarkozy
called for a meeting in Paris with Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi,
British Prime Minister Gordon Brown and German Chancellor Angela Merkel to
consider the response to the 2008 financial crisis and the Great Recession.
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development describes them as
the "Four Big European Countries".

## Issues

The leaders of the four countries usually have a series of joint video
conference calls with the US president (see NATO Quint), or with other
leaders, on international issues. With US President Barack Obama, for example,
they discussed the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, the Syrian
civil war and the use of chemical weapons during the conflict, the Russian
annexation of Crimea and international sanctions against Russia, the post-
civil war violence in Libya, the Israeli–Palestinian conflict, the 2014
American intervention in Iraq and the Ebola virus disease. With Russian
President Vladimir Putin, they discussed, for example, the Vienna peace talks
for Syria.

## Statistics

Big Four  
---  
Country  | Population  | Share of EU population[A] | Contribution to EU budget (2014-2020) (€ mil)  | MEPs  
France | 66,616,416  | 14.97%  | 19,573.6  | 27.52%  | 79   
Germany | 80,716,000  | 18.54%  | 25,815.9  | 36.30%  | 96   
Italy | 60,782,668  | 13.58%  | 14,368.2  | 20.20%  | 76   
United Kingdom | 67,791,400  | N/A  | 11,341.6  | 15.95%  | N/A   
**Total** | 272,215,084  | 47.09%  | 71,099.3  | 64.24%  | 251   
  
**A** Council of EU voting, where procedure indicates a qualified majority
vote, requires a double majority of at least 55% of EU member states and 65%
of EU population to adopt Commission proposals. This increases to 72% of EU
member states and 65% of EU population when the proposal originates from a
member state.

## History

France, Germany, Italy and the United Kingdom have been referred to as the
"Big Four of Europe" since the interwar period (1919–1939), when the four
countries signed the Four-Power Pact and the Munich Agreement. Britain and
France, permanent members of the League of Nations' executive council along
with Italy and Japan, were involved in a policy of appeasement towards
Germany. World War II (1939–1945) saw the United States, the United Kingdom,
Russia, France and China fighting against Germany, Italy and Japan. The defeat
of the Axis powers resulted in the formation of the United Nations, where the
five victorious countries of the Allied powers were granted a permanent seat
in the Security Council. Germany, Italy and Japan experienced a post-war
economic miracle and took part in the 1st G6 summit along with France, the
United Kingdom and the United States in 1975.

Since 1945, France and Great Britain have often acted alone in defence policy
matters while Germany and Italy have preferred to act within the framework of
international organisations. For example, France, Germany, Italy and the UK
were the EU countries represented in the Syria peace talks, but only France
and the UK are directly bombing ISIS in Syria, while Germany and Italy prefer
to give military aid and to send training troops.

US President Barack Obama with EU4 leaders Hollande, Cameron, Merkel and Renzi
during the 2014 Wales summit

### Quint

The Quint (or NATO Quint) is an informal decision-making group consisting of
five Western powers: the United States and the Big Four (France, Germany,
Italy and the United Kingdom). It operates as a "directoire" of various
entities such as NATO and the G7/G20.

### Brexit

A European Union membership referendum took place on Thursday 23 June 2016 in
the UK and resulted in an overall vote to leave the EU, by 51.9%. The British
government triggered Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union to begin the
process to leave the EU, which concluded on 31 January 2020. The G4 now
consists of the UK and the new EU big three (Germany, France and Italy), the
large founding members of the European Communities that have retaken a leading
role in Europe following the decision of the UK to leave the EU.

## Current government leaders

  * **France**  
Emmanuel Macron, President

  * **Germany**  
Friedrich Merz, Chancellor

  * **Italy**  
Giorgia Meloni, Prime Minister

  * **United Kingdom**  
Keir Starmer, Prime Minister