Legislature of the Central American Integration System

Part of a series on  
---  
Central America  
Countries

  * Belize
  * Costa Rica
  * El Salvador
  * Guatemala
  * Honduras
  * Nicaragua
  * Panama

  
Culture**Cuisine**

  * Belize
  * Costa Rica
  * El Salvador
  * Guatemala
  * Honduras
  * Nicaragua
  * Panama

* * *

**Spanish**

  * Belize
  * Costa Rica
  * El Salvador
  * Guatemala
  * Honduras
  * Nicaragua
  * Panama

* * *

**Sports**

  * Central American Games
  * Central American and Caribbean Games
  * Football Union

* * *

**By country**

  * Belize
  * Costa Rica
  * El Salvador
  * Guatemala
  * Honduras
  * Nicaragua
  * Panama

* * *  
  
Demographics

  * Ethnic groups
  * Maya peoples

* * *

**Indigenous people**

  * Belize
  * Costa Rica
  * El Salvador
  * Guatemala
  * Honduras
  * Nicaragua
  * Panama

* * *

**By country**

  * Belize
  * Costa Rica
  * El Salvador
  * Guatemala
  * Honduras
  * Nicaragua
  * Panama

  
Economy**Tourism**

  * Belize
  * Costa Rica
  * El Salvador
  * Guatemala
  * Honduras
  * Nicaragua
  * Panama

* * *

**By country**

  * Belize
  * Costa Rica
  * El Salvador
  * Guatemala
  * Honduras
  * Nicaragua
  * Panama

  
Education**By country**

  * Belize
  * Costa Rica
  * El Salvador
  * Guatemala
  * Honduras
  * Nicaragua
  * Panama

  
Geography and geology

  * Deforestation
  * Darién Gap
  * Isthmus of Panama
  * Middle America Trench
  * Seaway
  * Volcanic Arc

* * *

**Lists**

  * Islands
  * Mammals
  * Mountain ranges
    * Peaks
    * Summits
    * Ultra-prominent summits
  * Rivers

* * *

**Regions**

  * Central Highlands
  * Dry Corridor
  * Dry forests
  * Montane forests
  * Pine–oak forests

* * *

**By country**

  * Belize
  * Costa Rica
  * El Salvador
  * Guatemala
  * Honduras
  * Nicaragua
  * Panama

* * *  
  
History**Early history**

  * Peopling of the Americas
  * Maya civilization
  * Tikal
  * Copán

* * *

**Spanish conquests**

  * El Salvador
  * Honduras
  * Maya
    * Guatemala
    * Petén
  * Nicaragua

* * *

**Colonial history**

  * Captaincy General of Guatemala (1542-1821)
  * Viceroyalty of New Granada (1717-1821)
  * Act of Independence (1821)

* * *

**19th-20th century**

  * Under Mexican rule (1822-1823)
  * Federal Republic (1823-1839) 
    * Heads of state
  * Los Altos (1838-1840)
  * Greater Republic (1896-1898)
  * Federation (1921-1922)  

* * *

**Conflicts**

  * First Civil War
  * Second Civil War
  * Banana Wars
  * Costa Rican Civil War
  * Guatemalan Civil War
  * Football War
  * Nicaraguan Revolution
  * Salvadoran Civil War
  * US invasion of Panama
  * Salvadoran gang crackdown

* * *

**By country**

  * Belize
  * Costa Rica
  * El Salvador
  * Guatemala
  * Honduras
  * Nicaragua
  * Panama

* * *  
  
Politics and government

  * CA-4 Border Agreement
  * Integration System
  * Northern Triangle
  * Parliament
  * Reunification

* * *

**Elections**

  * Belize
  * Costa Rica
  * El Salvador
  * Guatemala
  * Honduras
  * Nicaragua
  * Panama

* * *

**Foreign relations**

  * Belize
  * Costa Rica
  * El Salvador
  * Guatemala
  * Honduras
  * Nicaragua
  * Panama

* * *

**By country**

  * Belize
  * Costa Rica
  * El Salvador
  * Guatemala
  * Honduras
  * Nicaragua
  * Panama

  
Religion

  * Anglican Church
  * Bahá'í Faith
  * Buddhism
  * Roman Catholicism

* * *

**By country**

  * Belize
  * Costa Rica
  * El Salvador
  * Guatemala
  * Honduras
  * Nicaragua
  * Panama

  
Transportation

  * Inter-American Highway
  * Migrant caravans
  * Bus transport
  * Rail transport
  * List of busiest airports
  * List of largest airlines

* * *

**By country**

  * Belize
  * Costa Rica
  * El Salvador
  * Guatemala
  * Honduras
  * Nicaragua
  * Panama

  
Related articles

  * Indigenous arts
  * Mesoamerica
  * Middle America (Americas)
  * Latin America
  * Americas (terminology)

  
Central America portal  
  
  * v
  * t
  * e

  
  
14°36′57″N 90°30′38″W﻿ / ﻿14.61583301682892°N 90.5105865068205°W﻿ /
14.61583301682892; -90.5105865068205

The **Central American Parliament** (Spanish: _Parlamento Centroamericano_),
also known as **PARLACEN** , is the political institution and parliamentary
body of the Central American Integration System (SICA). Its headquarters are
in Guatemala City.

## History

| This section **does notcite any sources**. Please help improve this section
by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged
and removed. _( April 2016)__(Learn how and when to remove this message)_  
---|---  
  
The PARLACEN's origins date back to the Contadora group, a project of the
1980s that sought to help resolve the civil wars in El Salvador, Guatemala,
and Nicaragua. Although the Contadora group was disbanded in 1986, the idea of
a greater Central American integration remained, giving rise to the Esquipulas
II Agreement, which among other things, created the Central American
Parliament. The Treaty establishing the Central American Parliament and other
political bodies was signed in 1987; its first formal session was carried out
on 28 October 1991 in Guatemala City.

The PARLACEN as a political body in the region is part of the Central American
Integration System (SICA), established by the Protocol of Tegucigalpa to the
Charter of the Organization of American States (ODECA) signed on 13 December
1991. SICA has the fundamental aim to realize an integration that is political
and ideological representative in a pluralistic democratic system that
guarantees free elections and participation under equal conditions for
political parties.

The historic Declaration of Esquipulas I, which was adopted by the presidents
of the Central American states in the city of Esquipulas, Guatemala on 25 May
1986, included the following declaration: "It is necessary to establish and
complement activities that support understanding and cooperation with
institutional structures. They shall make possible to strengthen the dialogue,
the common development, democracy and pluralism as fundamental elements for
peace in the region and the integration of Central America. Therefore the
foundation of PARLACEN is necessary. Its members are elected freely by
universal and direct elections through which the principle of political and
participative pluralism is followed."

The agreement of PARLACEN and other political authorities was signed in
October 1987 by Guatemala, El Salvador, Costa Rica, Nicaragua, and Honduras.
In the beginning, it was an instrument which came into force for only three
states (Guatemala, El Salvador and Honduras) on 1 May 1990. PARLACEN was
formed on 28 October 1991 and has its head office in Guatemala City,
Guatemala.

The Legislative Yuan, Taiwan's legislative body, was granted permanent
observer status at PARLACEN in 1999. However PARLACEN signaled a shift in
approach when on 28 April 2022 it made a statement to support a One China
policy. The following year, on 21 August 2023, the PARLACEN Plenary Assembly
voted to revoke the permanent observer status of Taiwan's legislative body and
include China's National People's Congress as a permanent observer instead.
The vote was made at the request of the Nicaraguan delegation which argued
that "Taiwan lacks recognition as a sovereign state at the United Nations" and
that the "observer status that Taiwan holds at PARLACEN is illegitimate due to
lack of legal status", also noting a UN resolution concerning Chinese
representation at the UN. The Chinese government welcomed the development.

## Legal status and mission

| This section **does notcite any sources**. Please help improve this section
by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged
and removed. _( April 2016)__(Learn how and when to remove this message)_  
---|---  
  
PARLACEN is the regional assembly of SICA and acts as a permanent political
organ to represent opinions and to carry out analyses and discussions about
political, economic and cultural affairs of common interest, of basic
conditions for democracy, peace, and the integration of Central America, as
well to work out initiatives for its realization. It is charged with
furthering human rights and international law, to achieve a peaceful
coexistence within the framework of security and social welfare, a mission
which is well-founded in representative and participative democracy, in
pluralism, and in respect for national legislation and international
law.[_citation needed_]

PARLACEN has the status of a legal entity according to international law.

## Member states

A clickable Euler diagram showing the relationships between various
multinational organizations in the Americas

  * v
  * t
  * e

The following countries comprise the PARLACEN:

  * Guatemala
  * El Salvador
  * Honduras
  * Nicaragua
  * Dominican Republic
  * Panama

Between 1998 and 2010, the Dominican Republic sent 22 appointed members. Since
2010, it has been a full member of the Central American Parliament with
delegates elected directly by universal suffrage. (See note)

On July 31, 2025, El Salvador’s Legislative Assembly passed a constitutional
reform to officially withdraw from the Central American Parliament (PARLACEN).
The move reflects a shift in the country’s foreign and regional strategy,
citing PARLACEN’s limited legal authority and the desire to reduce public
spending. This marks a clear departure from previous approaches to regional
integration. As a result, El Salvador will stop electing representatives to
the body starting with the 2027 legislative elections.

### Panama

President of Panama Ricardo Martinelli vowed he would remove Panama from
PARLACEN, fulfilling a campaign promise. On 11 December 2009, law 78 passed
withdrawing Panama from PARLACEN, but a resolution of the Central American
Court of Justice declared the law unconstitutional. The court said there is no
mechanism to withdraw from the PARLACEN and Panama could not opt out. In
January 2012, the Panamanian Supreme Court re-affirmed that ruling and Panama
returned to PARLACEN. Panama also showed more interest in membership after
SICA signed a free trade agreement with the European Union.

### Observer status

  * China
  * Mexico
  * Venezuela
  * Puerto Rico
  * Morocco

### Former observers

  * Taiwan (1999 to 22 August 2023 upon its de-recognition by PARLACEN)

## Competences and tasks

The PARLACEN is the regional and permanent organ of political and democratic
representation of SICA with the main purpose to realize the Central American
integration.

### Competencies

  * Proposal of legislation concerning the integration.
  * Democratic control of the integration.
  * Initiatives to deepen and amplify the integration.

### Tasks

  * Promoting the process of integration and leading the way to the greatest possible cooperation between the Central American states.
  * Proposing draft treaties and agreements which are to be negotiated by the Central American states and forming an opinion of what the SICA proposes.
  * Creating special commissions to determine the discordances between the states that could affect the integration.
  * Helping to consolidate a democratic, pluralistic, and participative form of government in the Central American states.
  * Promoting the validity of international law.
  * Knowing the official executive authorities of SICA.
  * Knowing the budgets of the institutions of SICA.

## Bodies of PARLACEN

PARLACEN's organisational structure consists of the Plenum, the Board of
Parliament, and the Secretary Office.

### Plenum

The Plenum is the highest body of PARLACEN and includes all representatives.
The committees and parliamentary parties are also involved with its tasks.

The responsibilities of the Plenum are the following:

  * Advice to the presidents' assembly concerning affairs of peace, security of Central America, and development of the region.
  * Annual election of the board of parliament.
  * Approval of the budget of PARLACEN.
  * Assessment and decision concerning the reports of the board of parliament.
  * Composition and approval of internal decrees of PARLACEN and other necessary regulations.
  * Formation of working commissions.
  * Proposal of drafts of contracts and agreements that are to be negotiated between the states of Central America.
  * Annual discharge of the boards of the parliamentary standing committees.
  * Other tasks which are assigned to it by its constitutive contract or its additional instruments.

#### Parliamentary committees

The parliamentary committees are parliamentary authorities who – in order to
draw up a corresponding report – are supposed to conduct studies and
examinations which are either within their sphere of competence or are
directed to them by the board or the Plenum.

The working committees of PARLACEN can be structured as follows.

Permanent commissions are established in the internal rules to work on affairs
of the commission with unlimited duration. The permanent commissions are
formed of at most two representatives per state, not exceeding twelve members
in total.

As of 2015[update], there were thirteen permanent commissions:

  * Commission of Agriculture, Fishing, Environment and Natural Resources
  * Commission of Urban Development, Public Participation
  * Commission of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology
  * Commission of Women, Children, Youth and Family
  * Commission of Macroeconomics and Finance
  * Commission of Tourism
  * Commission of International Relations and Migration Affairs
  * Commission of Health, Social Security, Population, Labour and Corporation Affairs
  * Commission of Peace, Public Security and Human Rights
  * Commission of Integration, Trade and Economic Development
  * Commission of Legal Affairs and Regional Institutions
  * Commission of Politics and Party Affairs
  * Commission of Indigenous Peoples and Afro Descendants

There is also a delegation of EUROLAT.

Extraordinary commissions are established by the Plenum for affairs that are
of special importance and institutional significance for PARLACEN as well as
for the process of integration.

Special commissions are established by the board of parliament to handle
special affairs.

#### Parliamentary groups

The parliamentary groups monitor the political trend of the Central American
representatives and are organized according to the political orientation of
their groups.

The parliamentary groups are founded by the adoption of an internal statute by
the plenary assembly. The board of parliament registers each parliamentary
group. The statute is published and states the group's ideological principles,
the political objectives and the regulations.

There are three parliamentary groups: the Parliamentary Group of the Left,
Center-Democratic Integration Group, and Democratic Integrationist Union.

### Board of parliament

| This section **does notcite any sources**. Please help improve this section
by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged
and removed. _( April 2016)__(Learn how and when to remove this message)_  
---|---  
  
The board of parliament is the executive body for decisions that emerge from
the Plenum and is the administrative body of PARLACEN. It is expandable
according to its internal rules.

The board of parliament is elected from the members. Its term is one year,
made up of one president, five vice-presidents, and six secretaries.

The board makes its decisions by approval of a majority of its members. In the
event of a tie, the votes of the presidency count as qualified majority. The
presidency is filled by a rota system corresponding to the alphabetical order
of the member states, starting with the state which holds the head office.

It is possible to appeal any resolution at the Plenum.

The tasks of the board are

  * Consideration and handling of all requests for which PARLACEN is in charge.
  * Conveying of the invitations for the ordinary and extraordinary meetings of the Plenum of PARLACEN.
  * Draft of the budget – designated in Central American Pesos – for the routine work of PARLACEN.
  * Realizing the resolutions of PARLACEN.
  * Handing in the annual report about the execution of its duties and the result of its administration to the plenary as well as the report about the budget.
  * Management and control of the secretary office and appointment of necessary personnel. Here, the equal treatment of all Central American states has to be taken into consideration.
  * Handling of the economic and organizational affairs which affect PARLACEN.
  * Proposal to the Plenum of regulating instruments which are required by the internal order.
  * Creation of special commissions to carry out a task or realize a special function.
  * Proper filling in of vacancies that occur in absence of a representative.
  * Calling of the deputy representative in case of vacancies.
  * Proposal of a suitable list of candidates for the appointment of the internal and external accountants of PARLACEN to the plenary.
  * Formation of delegations for official missions. This has to be done in accordance to the regulating norms for the integration of special missions of PARLACEN.
  * Establishing its own internal rules
  * Dividing tasks among its members.
  * Other tasks which are assigned to the board by the constitutive contract or by additional instruments.

### Secretary office

The secretary office is the technical-administrative organ of PARLACEN and is
divided into three sections, which have the following basic functions and
responsibilities:

The secretary office for parliamentary affairs handles and obeys the decisions
of PARLACEN. It reports to the Plenum on a regular basis and is of technical
assistance to the Plenum as well as to the commissions in all of their
activities. It coordinates and manages the advice of the commissions and has
to assist the extended board with developing the agenda for Plenum meetings
when necessary.

The secretary office for administration and finance has to administer all
branches, manager's offices, departments and administrative units, as well as
the personnel of PARLACEN, and has to control the proper administration of its
resources.

The secretary office of the board offers technical help to the board in
questions relating to the responsibilities of and the topics determined by the
board.

## Presidents of PARLACEN

President | Term in office | Country   
---|---|---  
Roberto Carpio Nicolle | October 1991 – October 1992  |  Guatemala  
Ilsa Díaz Zelaya | October 1992 – October 1993  |  Honduras  
José Francisco Merino López | October 1993 – July 1994  |  El Salvador  
Víctor Augusto Vela Mena | July 1994 – October 1994  |  Guatemala  
Roland Valenzuela Oyuela | October 1994 – December 1995  |  Honduras  
Raúl Zaldívar Guzmán | December 1995 – October 1996  |  Honduras  
Ernesto Lima Mena | October 1996 – October 1997  |  El Salvador  
Marco Antonio Solares Pérez | October 1997 – October 1998  |  Guatemala  
Carlos Roberto Reina | October 1998 – October 1999  |  Honduras  
José Ernesto Somarriba Sosa | October 1999 – October 2000  |  Nicaragua  
Hugo Guiraud Gargano | October 2000 – October 2001  |  Panama  
Rodrigo Samayoa Rivas | October 2001 – October 2002  |  El Salvador  
Victor Augusto Vela Mena  | October 2002 – October 2003  |  Guatemala  
Mario Facussé Handal | October 2003 – October 2004  |  Honduras  
Fabio Gadea Mantilla | October 2004 – October 2005  |  Nicaragua  
Julio Enrique Palacios Sambrano | October 2005 – October 2006  |  Panama  
Ciro Cruz Zepeda | October 2006 – October 2007  |  El Salvador  
Julio Guillermo González Gamarra | October 2007 – October 2008  |  Guatemala  
Gloria Guadalupe Oquelí Solórzano de Macoto | October 2008 – October 2009  |  Honduras  
Jacinto José Suárez Espinoza | October 2009 – October 2010  |  Nicaragua  
Dorindo Jayan Cortez Marciaga | October 2010 – October 2011  |  Panama  
Manolo Pichardo | October 2011 – October 2012  |  Dominican Republic  
Leonel Búcaro | October 2012 – October 2013  |  El Salvador  
Paula Rodríguez | October 2013 – October 2014  |  Guatemala  
Armando Bardales | October 2014 – October 2015  |  Honduras  
José Antonio Alvarado Correa | October 2015 – October 2016  |  Nicaragua  
Priscilla Weeden de Miró | October 2016 – October 2017  |  Panama  
Tony Raful Tejada | October 2017 – October 2018  |  Dominican Republic  
Irma Segunda Amaya Echeverría | October 2018 – October 2019  |  El Salvador  
Juan Alfonso Fuentes Soria | October 2019 – January 2020  |  Guatemala  
Nadia de León Torres | January 2020 – October 2020  |  Guatemala  
Fanny Carolina Salinas Fernández | October 2020 – October 2021  |  Honduras  
Guillermo Daniel Ortega Reyes | October 2021 – October 2022  |  Nicaragua  
Amado Cerrud Acevedo | October 2022 – October 2023  |  Panama  
Silvia García Polanco  | October 2023 – present  |  Dominican Republic  
  
## Composition

An aggregated map displaying the composition Country  | Party  | Seats  | Last election  | Next election  | Ref.  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
Dominican Republic |  | Modern Revolutionary Party | 12  | 19 May 2024 | 2028  |   
| People's Force | 4   
| Dominican Liberation Party | 4   
**Total:** | **20**  
El Salvador |  | Nuevas Ideas | 13  | 3 March 2024 | Withdrawing from PARLACEN  |   
| Nationalist Republican Alliance | 2   
| Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front | 2   
| Grand Alliance for National Unity | 2   
| Christian Democratic Party | 1   
**Total:** | **20**  
Guatemala |  | Vamos | 5  | 25 June 2023 | June 2027 |   
| National Unity of Hope | 4   
| Semilla | 3   
| Vision with Values | 2   
| Valor–Unionist Party | 2   
| Todos | 1   
| Will, Opportunity and Solidarity | 1   
| Nosotros | 1   
| Guatemalan National Revolutionary Unity–Winaq | 1   
**Total:** | **20**  
Honduras |  | Liberty and Refoundation | 10  | 28 November 2021 | 20 November 2025 |   
| National Party of Honduras | 8   
| Liberal Party of Honduras | 2   
**Total:** | **20**  
Nicaragua |  | Sandinista National Liberation Front | 15  | 7 November 2021 | November 2027 |   
| Constitutionalist Liberal Party | 2   
| Nicaraguan Liberal Alliance | 1   
| Independent Liberal Party | 1   
| Alliance for the Republic | 1   
**Total:** | **20**  
Panama |  | Realizing Goals | 9  | 5 May 2024 | 2029  |   
| People's Party | 5   
| Democratic Revolutionary Party | 1   
| Panameñista Party | 1   
| Alliance Party | 1   
| Nationalist Republican Liberal Movement | 1   
| Independent | 2   
**Total:** | **20**  
**Total:** | **120** |  2024  |  2025  |   
  
## Elections

The 20 elected members representing every member state the Central American
Parliament are elected at the same time as the presidential elections of the
member state according to article 2 of the Internal Regulations of the Central
American Parliament. The former president of every member state, as well as
every vice-president and prime minister, are also de jure members of the
PARLACEN from the end of their term till the end of their successor's term.

## Effectiveness and challenges

Costa Rica, one of the wealthier countries in the region and an otherwise-
active participant in the SICA, has not ratified the Esquipulas II agreement,
and is not represented in the Parlacen. Parlacen is seen by some (including
former President of Honduras Ricardo Maduro) as a white elephant.

## 2007 murder of parliamentary members

On 19 February 2007, a group of three Salvadoran representatives were murdered
by four Guatemalan police officers, including the head of the Guatemalan
National Police organized crime unit. The killers were arrested three days
later and detained in a Guatemalan prison, where they were themselves murdered
several days later by a group of gunmen disguised as prison guards. Guatemalan
president Óscar Berger attributed the officers' murders to an apparent mafia
hit aimed at hindering investigation into the representatives' murders. The
killings raised questions regarding corruption and drug trafficking in Central
America as well as the high level of infiltration of the Guatemalan national
police force by organized crime.