International organization

The **Central Commission for the Navigation of the Rhine** (**CCNR** ; French:
_Commission centrale pour la navigation du Rhin_ ; German: _Zentralkommission
für die Rheinschifffahrt_ ; Dutch: _Centrale Commissie voor de Rijnvaart_) is
an international organisation with five member countries, whose function is to
encourage European prosperity by guaranteeing a high level of security for
navigation of the Rhine and environs. Founded in 1815, it is the world's
oldest international organization still in operation. It has been based in
Strasbourg, France, since 1920. Lucia Luijten from the Netherlands has been
its Secretary General since November 1, 2021.

## Members

The current Member States are Germany, Belgium, France, the Netherlands and
Switzerland. Although the Rhine does not pass through Belgian territory, the
Belgian Rhine fleet is third after the Netherlands and Germany in terms of
volume transported.

Individual German states were members before World War I. The United States
was temporarily a member immediately after World War II, while Germany was
under Allied occupation, until 1961. Italy and the United Kingdom were also
members following the Treaty of Versailles, though Italy renounced its
position in 1935 and the UK renounced it in 1993.

## Functions

The entrance of the Palais du Rhin, with flag

Created as an international highway meant to promote commerce, today the
commission is responsible for regulating traffic on the Rhine, assisting with
works on the river, and functioning as the seat of the Rhine navigation
tribunal. Its operational budget is €2.7 million annually.

Since 1920, the headquarters of the commission has been located in Strasbourg,
in the former imperial palace, renamed the Palais du Rhin, which also houses
the Regional Directorate of Cultural Affairs of Alsace.

The commission meets in plenary session twice a year. The Member States are
represented by two to four commissioners and two deputy commissioners from
their administrations; decisions are taken unanimously.

Its working languages are German, French and Dutch, in accordance with Article
41 of its rules of procedure.

## History

Main assembly room of the Commission

Legally, the commission's authority comes from agreements made at the Congress
of Vienna, held in 1815 in the aftermath of the Napoleonic Wars. The first
meeting took place on 15 August 1816 in Mainz, with France, the Grand Duchy of
Baden, the Kingdom of Bavaria, the Grand Duchy of Hesse, the Duchy of Nassau,
the Netherlands and the Kingdom of Prussia represented.

In 1831, the Convention of Mainz was adopted, establishing a number of the
first laws governing Rhine navigation. In 1861, the commission's seat was
moved to Mannheim, and on 17 October 1868, the Mannheimer Akte was agreed to.
This agreement still governs the principles of Rhine navigation today.

Following the Franco-Prussian War of 1870, the commission primarily played the
role of a German-Dutch bilateral body, France having ceased to be a member
after the Treaty of Frankfurt (1871).

After the end of the First World War, the commission's headquarters was moved
to Strasbourg in 1920 as part of the Treaty of Versailles. Belgium, the
Kingdom of Italy and the United Kingdom, as well as Switzerland joined the
commission while Germany participated for the first time as a national entity
with the Weimar Republic. Italy withdrew in 1935 and Adolf Hitler denounced
Germany's membership on November 14, 1936. Following the Battle of France and
the armistice of June 22, 1940, the commission was suspended.

The commission resumed its work on November 20, 1945. The current revised
convention was signed in Strasbourg by the five current members of the
commission and the United Kingdom on 20 November 1963 and entered into force
on 14 April 1967. There have since been additional protocols.

In 2003 the European Commission asked for the permission of the Council of
Ministers to negotiate the adherence of the European Union to the regulations
of the CCNR and the Danube Commission, especially given the prospective
enlargement of the EU.