European forum of regional cooperation

The **Central European Initiative** (**CEI**) is a forum of regional
cooperation in Central and Eastern Europe, counting 17 member states. It was
formed in Budapest in 1989. The body was developed on the basis of earlier
experiences with The Alps-Adriatic Working Group. The CEI headquarters have
been in Trieste, Italy, since 1996.

## History

The **Central European Initiative** or **CEI** , is the largest and oldest
forum of regional cooperation in Central, Eastern and South Eastern Europe. It
now counts 17 member states, based on region and democratic values: Albania,
Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, the Czech Republic,
Hungary, Italy, Moldova, Montenegro, North Macedonia, Poland, Romania, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia and Ukraine. The origin of the Central European Initiative
lies in the creation of what was then known as the Quadragonale in Budapest on
11 November 1989 whose founding members were Italy, Austria, Hungary and the
Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (SFRY). The conjunction with the fall
of the Berlin Wall was a coincidence, yet the CEI has been involved in
democratizing Eastern European countries after the Soviet Bloc dissolved.

The Initiative aimed at overcoming the division in blocks by re-establishing
cooperation links, among countries of different political orientations and
economic structures. This was largely headed by Italy, who at the time, wanted
greater involvement in supporting Eastern European countries in order to rival
a newly reunited Germany.

At the first Summit in Venice in 1990, Czechoslovakia was admitted and the
Initiative was renamed Pentagonale. In 1991, with the admission of Poland it
became the Hexagonale.

The organization was renamed Central European Initiative (CEI) from the
Hexagonale in 1992, and has held the name since. On the same occasion,
Macedonia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Slovenia were admitted as
member states. That year, Yugoslavia's recognition ceased, due to a violent
break ups of the nation and the recognition of Croatia and Slovakia as
independent nations. The Czech Republic and Slovakia were admitted to the CEI
in 1993 following the dissolution of Czechoslovakia. In 1996, Albania,
Belarus, Bulgaria, Moldova, Romania and Ukraine joined the CEI as full-fledged
members.

In recent years the CEI has focused on expanding healthcare access within its
17 member states. It has partnered with the World Health Organization (WHO) to
focus on preventing unwanted consequences from the pandemic and the sharing of
health information. They have met regularly since this partnership was founded
in June of 2022, with the most recent meeting happening November 2024. In the
latest meeting, the organizations focused on health in the Western Balkans,
implementing focus on integration following the EU model.

## Structures

The structure of the CEI is unique, with changing staff, headquarters or
budget. It operates through regular forums, usually held in November that
invite senior officials and politicians. There are 5 regular meetings,

  * Heads of State/Government Meeting (annually, in the autumn);
  * Parliamentary Dimension (the CEI Parliamentary Committee which meets in the spring and the CEI Parliamentary Conference which meets in the autumn);
  * Foreign Ministers Meeting (annually, in the spring, but Foreign Ministers also attend and take part in the Heads of Government meeting);
  * Special Meetings of Sectoral Ministers;
  * Meetings of the Committee of National Coordinators (monthly)

One member state of the CEI takes on the role of the presidency each year,
leading forums and meetings. In 1995, the Heads of Government meeting adopted
an official documentation of the rules, guidelines and definition of the CEI.
"forum for cooperation in the region' which 'does not replace other, bilateral
and multilateral channels of cooperation, neither affects the commitments of
the Member States resulting of their respective international agreements". It
has a "bottom-up" approach to promote regional cooperation and growth,
particularly in newly democratic states.

The CEI has a three-pillar system: It cooperates in a governmental dimension,
a parliamentary dimension and a business dimension.

It promotes connectivity and diversity through 6 main areas: Good governance,
economic growth, media freedom, environmental protection, intercultural
cooperation and scientific cooperation/education & training. The CEI
implements its activities through cooperative activities, such as Working
Groups, EU-projects, Know-how exchange programme and technical cooperation
with the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD). Each working
group is chaired by a different country and has a unique focus. Since 2019,
Roberto Antonione (Italy) has been the secretary general.

## CEI Presidencies

Year  | Country   
---|---  
2025  | Serbia   
2024  | Albania   
2023  | Moldova   
2022  | Bulgaria   
2021  | Montenegro  _(due to covid related cancellation of most of the 2020 program)_  
2020  | Montenegro   
2019  | Italy   
2018  | Croatia   
2017  | Belarus   
2016  | Bosnia and Herzegovina   
2015  | Macedonia   
2014  | Austria   
2013  | Hungary   
2012  | Ukraine   
2011  | Serbia   
2010  | Montenegro   
2009  | Romania   
2008  | Moldova   
2007  | Bulgaria   
2006  | Albania   
2005  | Slovakia   
2004  | Slovenia   
2003  | Poland   
2002  | Macedonia   
2001  | Italy   
2000  | Hungary   
1999  | Czech Republic   
1998  | Croatia   
1997  | Bosnia and Herzegovina   
1996  | Austria   
1995  | Poland   
1994  | Italy   
1993  | Hungary   
1992  | Austria   
1991  | Yugoslavia   
1990  | Italy   
1989  | Hungary   
  
## Membership

**Founding members** :

  * Austria (1989-2018)
  * Hungary (1989)
  * Italy (1989)
  * _SFR Yugoslavia_ (1989–1992)

**Joined later** :

  * _Czechoslovakia_ (1990–1992)
  * Poland (1991)
  * Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina (1992) →  Bosnia and Herzegovina
  * Croatia (1992)
  * Slovenia (1992)
  * Czech Republic (1993)
  * Macedonia (1993) →  North Macedonia
  * Slovakia (1993)
  * Albania (1995)
  * Belarus (1995) (suspended)
  * Bulgaria (1995)
  * Romania (1995)
  * Ukraine (1995)
  * Moldova (1996)
  * FR Yugoslavia (2000) →  Serbia and Montenegro →  Serbia
  * Montenegro (2006)