Military alliance of six post-Soviet states

The **Collective Security Treaty Organization** (**CSTO** , Russian:
Организация Договора о коллективной безопасности (ОДКБ), romanized:
_Organizatsiya dogovora o kollektivnoy bezopasnosti (**ODKB**)_) is an
intergovernmental military alliance in Eurasia consisting of six post-Soviet
states: Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Russia, and Tajikistan. The
Collective Security Treaty has its origins in the Soviet Armed Forces, which
was replaced in 1992 by the United Armed Forces of the Commonwealth of
Independent States, and was then itself replaced by the successor armed forces
of the respective independent states. Former members of the CSTO military
alliance were Azerbaijan, Georgia and Uzbekistan.

Similar to Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty and the Inter-American
Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance, Article 4 of the Collective Security Treaty
(CST) establishes that an aggression against one signatory would be perceived
as an aggression against all. The 2002 CSTO charter reaffirmed the desire of
all participating states to abstain from the use or threat of force.
Signatories are prohibited from joining other military alliances.

## Activities

### Military exercises

The CSTO holds yearly military command exercises for the CSTO nations to have
an opportunity to improve inter-organizational cooperation. The largest of
such exercises was held in Southern Russia and central Asia in 2011,
consisting of more than 10,000 troops and 70 combat aircraft.

### Operational procedures

Similar to NATO, the CSTO maintains a Parliamentary Assembly. CSTO employs a
"rotating presidency" system in which the country leading the CSTO alternates
every year. In order to deploy military bases of a third country in the
territory of the CSTO member-states, it is necessary to obtain the official
consent of all its members.

### Peacekeeping force

The Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) maintains a peacekeeping
force that has been deployed to areas of conflict, including Tajikistan and
Kyrgyzstan. The force is composed of troops from member states and is designed
to provide stability and security in the region.

On 6 October 2007, CSTO members agreed to a major expansion of the
organization that would create a CSTO peacekeeping force that could deploy
under a United Nations mandate or without one in its member states. The
expansion would also allow all members to purchase Russian weapons at the same
price as Russia.

In January 2022, the CSTO deployed 2,000 of its peacekeepers to Kazakhstan to
quell the local unrest.

### Collective Rapid Reaction Force

On 4 February 2009, an agreement to create the Collective Rapid Reaction Force
(KSOR) (Russian: Коллекти́вные си́лы операти́вного реаги́рования (КСОР)) was
reached by five of the seven members, with plans finalized on 14 June. The
force is intended to be used to repulse military aggression, conduct anti-
terrorist operations, fight transnational crime and drug trafficking, and
neutralize the effects of natural disasters.

Belarus and Uzbekistan initially refrained from signing on to the agreement.
Belarus did so because of a trade dispute with Russia, and Uzbekistan due to
general concerns. Belarus signed the agreement the following October, while
Uzbekistan has never done so. A source in the Russian delegation said
Uzbekistan would not participate in the collective force on a permanent basis
but would "delegate" its detachments to take part in operations on an _ad hoc_
basis.

On 3 August 2009, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Uzbekistan criticized
plans by Russia to establish a military base in southern Kyrgyzstan for the
CSTO rapid reaction force, stating,

> The implementation of such projects on complex and unpredictable territory,
> where the borders of three Central Asian republics directly converge, may
> give impetus to the strengthening of militarization processes and initiate
> all kinds of nationalistic confrontations. […] Also, it could lead to the
> appearance of radical extremist forces that could lead to serious
> destabilization in this vast region.

## History

### Foundation

A clickable Euler diagram showing the relationships among various
supranational organisations in the territory of the former Soviet Union

  * v
  * t
  * e

On 15 May 1992, six post-Soviet states belonging to the Commonwealth of
Independent States — Russia, Armenia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, and
Uzbekistan—signed the Collective Security Treaty (also referred to as the
Tashkent Pact or Tashkent Treaty). Three other post-Soviet states—Azerbaijan,
Belarus, and Georgia—acceded in 1993 and the treaty took effect in 1994. The
CST was set to last for a 5-year period unless extended. On 2 April 1999, six
of the nine—all but Azerbaijan, Georgia, and Uzbekistan—agreed to renew the
treaty for five more years. At the same time, Uzbekistan joined the GUAM
group, established in 1997 by Georgia, Ukraine, Azerbaijan, and Moldova, and
largely seen as intending to counter Russian influence in the region.

The CSTO was founded in 2002 when the six member states agreed to create the
_Collective Security Treaty Organization_ as a military alliance. As an
attempt to develop a successor alliance to the Warsaw Pact, the CSTO is
comparatively weak.

### 2003 to 2012

In 2004 the CSTO was granted Observer status in the UN General Assembly.

During 2005, the CSTO partners conducted some common military exercises.

CSTO and EAEC leaders in 2006

Uzbekistan withdrew from GUAM in 2005 and joined the CSTO in 2006 as a full
member and its membership was later ratified by the Uzbek parliament on 28
March 2008.

In October 2007, the CSTO signed an agreement with the Shanghai Cooperation
Organisation (SCO), in the Tajik capital of Dushanbe, to broaden cooperation
on issues such as security, crime, and drug trafficking.

On 6 October 2007, CSTO members agreed to a major expansion of the
organization that would create a CSTO peacekeeping force that could deploy
under a U.N. mandate or without one in its member states. The expansion would
also allow all members to purchase Russian weapons at the same price as
Russia.

On 29 August 2008, Russia announced it would seek CSTO recognition of the
independence of Abkhazia and South Ossetia. Three days earlier, on 26 August,
Russia recognized the independence of Georgia's breakaway regions of Abkhazia
and South Ossetia.

In 2009, Belarus boycotted the CSTO summit due to their Milk War with Russia.
After refusing to attend a CSTO summit in 2009, Lukashenko said: "Why should
my men fight in Kazakhstan? Mothers would ask me why I sent their sons to
fight so far from Belarus. For what? For a unified energy market? That is not
what lives depend on. No!"

After Kurmanbek Bakiyev was ousted from office as President of Kyrgyzstan as a
result of riots in Kyrgyzstan in April 2010, he was granted asylum in Belarus.
Belarusian President Alexander Lukashenko expressed doubt about the future of
the CSTO for failing to prevent Bakiyev's overthrow, stating: "What sort of
organization is this one, if there is bloodshed in one of our member states
and an anticonstitutional coup d'état takes place, and this body keeps
silent?"

Lukashenko had previously accused Russia of punishing Belarus with economic
sanctions after Lukashenko's refusal to recognize the independence of Abkhazia
and South Ossetia, stating: "The economy serves as the basis for our common
security. But if Belarus's closest CSTO ally is trying ... to destroy this
basis and de facto put the Belarusians on their knees, how can one talk about
consolidating collective security in the CSTO space?"

During a trip to Ukraine to extend Russia's lease of the Crimean port
Sevastopol in return for discounted natural gas supplies, Russian President
Dmitry Medvedev was asked about whether Belarus could expect a similar deal
and responded: "Real partnership is one thing and a declaration of intentions
is another; reaching agreement on working seriously, meeting each other
halfway, helping each other is one thing and making decisions about granting
permanent residence to people who have lost their job is another." The
Belarusian President defended himself against this criticism by citing former
Russian President Vladimir Putin's invitation of Askar Akayev to Russia after
he was ousted as President of Kyrgyzstan during the 2005 Tulip Revolution.

The following month, President Medvedev ordered the CEO of Russia's natural
gas monopoly Gazprom to cut gas supplies to Belarus in a dispute over
outstanding debts. Subsequently, the Russian television channel NTV, run by
Gazprom, aired a documentary film which compared Lukashenko to Bakiyev. Then
the Russian President's foreign policy adviser Sergei Prikhodko threatened to
publish the transcript of a CSTO meeting where Lukashenko said that his
administration would recognize Abkhazian and South Ossetian independence.

In June 2010, ethnic clashes broke out between ethnic Kyrgyz and Uzbeks in
southern Kyrgyzstan, leading interim Kyrgyz President Roza Otunbayeva to
request the assistance of Russian troops to quell the disturbances. Kurmanbek
Bakiyev denied charges that his supporters were behind the ethnic conflict and
called on the CSTO to intervene. Askar Akayev also called for the CSTO to send
troops, saying: "Our priority task right now should be to extinguish this
flame of enmity. It is very likely that we will need CSTO peacekeepers to do
that."[_citation needed_] The organization was considered by some a "paper
tiger" since it failed to intervene.

Russian President Dmitry Medvedev said that "only in the case of a foreign
intrusion and an attempt to externally seize power can we state that there is
an attack against the CSTO", and that, "all the problems of Kyrgyzstan have
internal roots", while CSTO Secretary General Nikolai Bordyuzha called the
violence "purely a domestic affair". Later, however, Bordyuzha admitted that
the CSTO response may have been inadequate and claimed that "foreign
mercenaries" provoked the Kyrgyz violence against ethnic Uzbek minorities.

On 21 July 2010, interim Kyrgyz President Roza Otunbayeva called for the
introduction of CSTO police units to southern Kyrgyzstan saying: "I think it's
important to introduce CSTO police forces there, since we're unable to
guarantee people's rights on our own." She also added: "I'm not seeking the
CSTO's embrace and I don't feel like bringing them here to stay but the
bloodletting there will continue otherwise." Only weeks later the deputy
chairman of Otubayeva's interim Kyrgyz government complained that their
appeals for help from the CSTO had been ignored. The CSTO was unable to agree
on providing military assistance to Kyrgyzstan at a meeting in Yerevan,
Armenia, which was attended by Roza Otunbayeva as well as Alexander
Lukashenko.

The CSTO meeting in Nur-Sultan, Kazakhstan, 8 November 2018

On 10 December 2010, the member states approved a declaration establishing a
CSTO peacekeeping force and a declaration of the CSTO member states, in
addition to signing a package of joint documents.

Since 21 December 2011, the Treaty parties can veto the establishment of new
foreign military bases in the member states of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO).

On 28 June 2012, Uzbekistan submitted a notification to the CSTO to suspended
its membership. In December 2012, the CSTO Collective Security Council decided
to suspend Uzbekistan.

### 2013 to 2022

CSTO Summit 2021 CSTO Summit 2022

In August 2014, 3,000 soldiers from the members of Armenia, Belarus,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Russia and Tajikistan participated in psychological
and cyber warfare exercises in Kazakhstan under war games managed by CSTO.

On 19 March 2015, the CSTO Secretary General Nikolai Bordyuzha offered to send
a peacekeeping mission to Donbas, Ukraine. "The CSTO has a peacekeeping
capacity. Our peacekeepers continuously undergo corresponding training. If
such a decision is taken by the United Nations, we stand ready to provide
peacekeeping units".

In July 2021, CSTO Secretary-General Stanislav Zas was criticized by Armenian
politicians for calling an incursion by Azerbaijani forces onto Armenian
territory a "border incident", where the CSTO remained inactive during the
conflict.

In July 2021, Tajikistan appealed to members of CSTO for help in dealing with
security challenges emerging from neighboring Afghanistan. Thousands of
Afghans, including police and government troops, fled to Tajikistan after
Taliban insurgents took control of many parts of Afghanistan.

On 5 January 2022, CSTO peacekeepers were announced to be deployed to
Kazakhstan in response to anti-government unrest in the country. On 11 January
the same year, CSTO forces began their withdrawal from Kazakhstan.

Since the start of the Russian invasion of Ukraine in February 2022 there has
been no CSTO involvement or official participation of other CSTO members in
the conflict, apart from Belarus which agreed to house Russian troops which
then attacked Ukraine from across its border. Following the 2023 Ukrainian
counteroffensive, the border between Ukraine and Belarus was cleared of
Russian forces.

### 2023 to present

Relations between Russia and Kazakhstan have deteriorated since the start of
Russia's invasion of Ukraine. The latter has refused to recognise the Donetsk
and the Luhansk People's Republics.

After the start of renewed fighting between Armenia and former member
Azerbaijan on 13 September 2022, Armenia triggered Article 4 of the treaty,
and a CSTO mission including CSTO Secretary General Stanislav Zas and Anatoly
Sidorov was sent to monitor the situation along the border. Similar events
also took place near the Kyrgyzstan–Tajikistan border throughout 2022.

After the CSTO mission took a rather uncommitted position in the conflict,
criticism towards CSTO membership inside Armenian political circles increased,
with the secretary of the Security Council of Armenia, Armen Grigoryan, even
stating that he saw no more hope for the CSTO. The lack of Russian support
during the conflict prompted a national debate in Armenia, as an increasing
percentage of the population indicated doubt as to whether it is beneficial to
continue CSTO membership, calling for realignment of the state with NATO
instead. This coincided with a visit from Speaker of the United States House
of Representatives Nancy Pelosi to Yerevan on 17 September 2022, largely seen
as an effort to reorient the security alliance structure of Armenia.

To discuss the results of the CSTO mission sent on 15 September 2022, an
extraordinary session of the CSTO was held via videoconference on 28 October
2022. With the leaders of all member states and CSTO Secretary General
Stanislav Zas in attendance, the meeting was chaired by Armenian Prime
Minister Nikol Pashinyan, who concurred with the report presented by the
Secretary General while also reiterating the importance for a clear political
assessment of Azerbaijani aggression and a roadmap for the restoration of
Armenian territorial integrity.

A regular Collective Security Council meeting took place on 23 November 2022
with the leaders of all CSTO members present to discuss matters of
international and regional security. After Pashinyan refused to sign the joint
declaration because it did not "reach a decision on a CSTO response to
Azerbaijan's aggression against Armenia", speculation arose regarding the
continuation of the CSTO. Secretary General Stanislas Zas indicated that,
though numerous measures in the diplomatic as well as military spheres were
generally agreed upon, no consensus regarding the situation on the border
could be reached. On the occasion of the meeting and in the midst of the 2022
Russian invasion of Ukraine, Belarusian President Alexander Lukashenko stated
that many in their countries had started to discuss the possibility that the
CSTO may cease to exist if Russia loses its war in Ukraine. He later expanded
on his opinion on the matter, stating that the CSTO will continue on and
nobody will fall, if there is unity. Meanwhile, during the meeting in Yerevan,
large groups of protestors gathered and called for the withdrawal of Armenia
from the CSTO and for the country to develop closer relations with the United
States and the West. In the aftermath of the meeting, the US think tank The
National Interest released an analysis on the current state of the CSTO,
concluding that, while the alliance is in a fragile state, only few other
nations could fill the void created by a possible Russian exit and step in as
a power broker in the region. Economic dependencies between the member states
have also increased since the start of the invasion and would dissuade the
alliance from splitting up.

The diplomatic friction continued into January 2023, after Pashinyan refused
to hold common military drills, because the organization did not unequivocally
condemn Azerbaijan over its perceived aggression. In response, Dmitry Peskov,
the Press Secretary of the President of Russia, stated that Armenia remains a
very close ally and promised to continue the dialogue. To mend their ties,
Sergey Lavrov offered the deployment of a CSTO mission along the Armenia-
Azerbaijan border on 2 February 2023 within one or two days, "if our Armenian
allies, friends are still interested in it like before".

Meeting of the Council of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Collective
Security Treaty Organization in Minsk (May 2023)

In May 2023, after the conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan escalated, the
Armenian Prime Minister Nikol Pashinyan said that Armenia could consider
withdrawing from the treaty due to the lack of support from Russia in the
conflict. In an interview with CNN broadcast on 1 June 2023, Pashinyan stated
that "Armenia is not an ally of Russia in the war in Ukraine".

On 3 September 2023, during an interview, Armenian prime minister Nikol
Pashinyan stated that it was a strategic mistake for Armenia to solely rely on
Russia to guarantee its security. Pashinyan stated, "Moscow has been unable to
deliver and is in the process of winding down its role in the wider South
Caucasus region" and "the Russian Federation cannot meet Armenia's security
needs. This example should demonstrate to us that dependence on just one
partner in security matters is a strategic mistake." Pashinyan accused Russian
peacekeepers deployed to uphold the ceasefire deal of failing to do their job.
Pashinyan confirmed that Armenia was trying to diversify its security
arrangements, most notably with the European Union and the United States.

During the September 2023 Armenian protests that began following the 2023
Azerbaijani offensive in Nagorno-Karabakh, demonstrators surrounded the
Russian embassy in Yerevan criticizing Russia's refusal to intervene in the
offensive. Some protesters called for the rejection of the Alma-Ata Protocol,
and Armenia's withdrawal from the CSTO.

Armenia declined participating in military exercises at the CIS summit in
Kyrgyzstan in October 2023 and asked for Russian peacekeeping forces to return
to Russia. The Prime Minister of Armenia, Nikol Pashinyan, went further in
late October saying he saw "no advantage" in the presence of Russian troops in
Armenia. as of October 2023[update], approximately 10,000 Russian troops were
stationed in Gyumri.

2024 CSTO Summit in Astana

On 23 February 2024, Armenian Prime Minister, Nikol Pashinyan, confirmed that
Armenia had frozen its participation in the CSTO. Pashinyan stated, "We have
now in practical terms frozen our participation in this treaty" and
"membership of the CSTO was under review" during a live broadcast interview.
On 28 February 2024, during a speech made in the National Assembly, Pashinyan
further stated that the CSTO is "a threat to the national security of
Armenia". Responding to Pashinyan's remarks, Dmitri Peskov stated that the
CSTO charter does not include provisions for a "frozen membership" status. On
12 March, Pashinyan said that the CSTO needed to clarify "what constitutes
Armenia's sovereign territory", as the organization had not come to Armenia's
defence when requested following Azerbaijani troops crossing the border into
Armenia's internationally recognized territory. Pashinyan said that if the
CSTO's response did not align with Armenia's expectations, the country would
officially withdraw from the organization. On 8 May 2024, Armenia announced it
had stopped making financial contributions to the CSTO, leading Russia to
state that it was still obligated to pay its membership dues. On 12 June 2024,
Armenia announced that it would formally withdraw from the alliance at an
unspecified later date, with Pashinyan stating, "We will leave. We will decide
when to exit...Don't worry, we won't return".

A July 2024 Gallup opinion poll noted a 7% increase in support for Armenia's
membership in NATO, with 29% of respondents believing Armenia should strive
for NATO membership. Meanwhile, support for Armenia's membership in the CSTO
decreased by 10%, with only 16.9% believing Armenia should maintain its
membership in the CSTO.

On 6 August 2024, the Ukrainian Armed Forces launched an incursion into
Russia's Kursk Oblast and clashed with the Russian Armed Forces and Russian
border guard. On 17 August 2024, it was reported that CSTO countries have
neither supported nor condemned the Ukrainian invasion of Russia.

On 4 December 2024, during parliamentary discussions in the National Assembly,
Armenian Prime Minister Nikol Pashinyan stated that "we already consider
ourselves outside the CSTO" and "I believe we have crossed the point of no
return" in regards to Armenia's membership status in the CSTO.

## Membership

### Member states

Map showing the CSTO members, observers and associated members. Includes the
Russian-occupied territories of Ukraine, the Russian-occupied territories in
Georgia, and the breakaway republic Transnistria.

**Member states of the Collective Security Treaty Organization:**

Member country | Capital | Population | Area | Ratification of Collective  
Security Treaty | Ratification of the Protocol  
on extension of the treaty | Ratification of the  
CSTO charter  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
Armenia | Yerevan | 003,015,400 | 29,743 km2 (11,484 sq mi) | 15 May 1992 | 2 April 1999 | 18 September 2003   
Belarus | Minsk | 009,155,000 | 207,595 km2 (80,153 sq mi) | 31 December 1993   
Kazakhstan | Astana | 0020,286,000 | 2,724,900 km2 (1,052,090 sq mi) | 15 May 1992   
Kyrgyzstan | Bishkek | 007,213,000 | 200,105 km2 (77,261 sq mi)  
Russia | Moscow | 00146,150,000 | 17,125,191 km2 (6,612,073 sq mi)  
Tajikistan | Dushanbe | 0010,786,000 | 143,100 km2 (55,251 sq mi)  
  
### Former member states

Former member country | Capital | Ratification of Collective  
Security Treaty | Withdraw from   
the treaty |   
---|---|---|---|---  
Azerbaijan | Baku | 24 September 1993 | 2 April 1999 | Did not sign the Protocol on extension of the Treaty   
Georgia | Tbilisi | 9 September 1993   
Uzbekistan | Tashkent | 15 May 1992   
16 August 2006 | 19 December 2012 | Membership suspended   
  
### Non-member observer states in the CSTO Parliamentary Assembly

The National Assembly of the Republic of Serbia and the Wolesi Jirga (lower
house) of the National Assembly of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan were
accorded observer status in the CSTO Parliamentary Assembly in 2013, though
the Islamic Republic collapsed in 2021 as the Taliban took over. Also, the
Parliamentary Assembly of the Union of Belarus and Russia has observer status
in the CSTO Parliamentary Assembly.

Country  | Participating Body  | Year of entry   
---|---|---  
Serbia | National Assembly of the Republic of Serbia | 2013   
Union State | Parliamentary Assembly of the Union of Belarus and Russia | 2010   
Afghanistan | National Assembly of the Republic of Afghanistan | 2013-2021   
  
### Potential membership

In May 2007, the CSTO secretary general Nikolai Bordyuzha suggested Iran could
join the CSTO saying, "The CSTO is an open organization. If Iran applies in
accordance with our charter, we will consider the application". If Iran joined
it would be the first state outside the former Soviet Union to become a member
of the organization.

In 2021, Uzbekistan, after becoming observer to EAEU on 11 December 2020,
conducted a bilateral military exercise with Russia and trilateral military
exercise with Russia and Tajikistan, while its president joined a CSTO meeting
as a guest, sparking rumours about potential reentry into CSTO.

## Structure

The current secretary general is former Kazakh Prime Minister Imangali
Tasmagambetov, who took office on 1 January 2023.

## Policy agenda

### Information technology and cyber security

The member states adopted measures to counter cyber security threats and
information technology crimes in a Foreign Ministers Council meeting in Minsk,
Belarus. Foreign Minister Abdrakhmanov put forward a proposal to establishing
a Cyber Shield system.

## Military personnel

_The following list is sourced from the 2020 edition of "The Military Balance"
published annually by theInternational Institute for Strategic Studies._

Country  | Active Military  | Reserve Military  | Paramilitary  | Total  | Per 1000 Capita (Total)  | Per 1000 Capita  
(Active)  | Notes   
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
Armenia | 70,600  | 210,000  | 4,300  | 284,900  | 93.6  | 23.2  |   
Belarus | 85,000  | 580,750  | 110,000  | 775,750  | 81.2  | 8.9  |   
Kazakhstan | 108,000  | 132,000  | 30,000  | 270,000  | 13.8  | 5.5  |   
Kyrgyzstan | 23,000  | 300,500  | 9,500  | 333,000  | 57.5  | 4  |   
Russia | 1,320,000  | 2,000,000  | 554,000  | 3,874,000  | 27.2  | 9.3  |   
Tajikistan | 9,500  | 600,000  | 7,500  | 617,000  | 72.9  | 1.1  |