Organization of unrecognized states

The **Community for Democracy and Rights of Nations** , also commonly and
colloquially known as the **Commonwealth of Unrecognized States** , rarely as
**CIS-2** , is an international organization in Eastern Europe and the South
Caucasus of three breakaway states in the territory of the former Soviet
Union, all of which have limited to no recognition from the international
community.

## History

### 1992–1999

A clickable Euler diagram showing the relationships among various
supranational organisations in the territory of the former Soviet Union

  * v
  * t
  * e

An agreement on creating the commonwealth was reached by the four separatist
states of the Pridnestrovian Moldavian Republic (Transnistria), the Republic
of Abkhazia, the Republic of Nagorno-Karabakh, and the Republic of South
Ossetia in 2001 at the foreign ministers meeting held in Stepanakert, the
capital of Nagorno-Karabakh. The Community for Democracy and Human Rights was
established on 14 June 2006 in Sokhumi, the capital of Abkhazia, by the
presidents of three of these states: Sergei Bagapsh representing Abkhazia,
Eduard Kokoity representing South Ossetia, and Igor Smirnov representing
Transnistria. Nagorno-Karabakh, which had been a part of the 2001 agreement,
left in 2004 but became a member state in 2007. All member states have had
limited international recognition: Abkhazia and South Ossetia are located
within the internationally recognized territory of Georgia, Artsakh was within
Azerbaijan, and Transnistria is within Moldova. All of them were secured by
the presence of Russian military forces.

### 2000–2005

The first step towards co-operation between Abkhazia and Transnistria was
taken immediately after the end of the Abkhazian-Georgian War when their
foreign ministries signed the first co-operation agreement. Then, in Tiraspol
from 20-22 November 2000, the Foreign Ministers of Abkhazia, Nagorno-Karabakh,
South Ossetia, and Transnistria decided to establish a permanent coordinating
body – the Meeting of Foreign Ministers. According to another source, the body
was called the Committee of Foreign Ministers of Unrecognized States, and the
agreement on creating it was signed during the meeting. In addition, an
expert-level advisory council was created to carry out preparatory work
between meetings, which should be held at least twice a year.

For the next meeting of the foreign ministers of Abkhazia, Nagorno-Karabakh,
Transnistria, and South Ossetia, which took place in Stepanakert (Khankendi)
on 2-3 July 2001, the advisory council developed regulations for the
organization, which were adopted at the meeting. A Joint Statement and a Final
Communiqué were adopted. Observers assessed the appearance of the conference
mostly with skepticism, with _Nezavisimaya Gazeta_ referring to it as the
"Union of the Marginalized". Initially, there was also a proposal to name the
conference NATO-2 (**N** agorno-Karabakh Republic, **A** bkhazia, **T**
ransnistria, and **O** ssetia).

On 22 August 2001, a Protocol on co-operation and consultations between the
Ministries of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Abkhazia and the
Pridnestrovian Moldavian Republic was signed in Sokhumi. The Protocol is one
of a number of documents regulating relations between the two republics at the
diplomatic level. After Stepanakert, the name CIS-2 (Commonwealth of
Unrecognized States) became widespread, and the founders began using it. For
example, in 2005, the head of the Foreign Ministry of the Pridnestrovian
Moldavian Republic contrasted the CIS-2 and GUAM.

Subsequently, this gave rise to writing in the press that the idea of creating
the CIS-2 at one time originated in Stepanakert. A number of meetings were
held within the framework of the CIS-2. Thus, in March 2002, the heads of the
unrecognized states held a meeting in Tiraspol to coordinate their actions
within the framework of the CIS-2 bloc they created. In September 2002, the
head of the foreign policy department of South Ossetia announced the
possibility of creating a military bloc in the future by the unrecognized
states that arose on the territory of the former USSR.

In March 2005, the Russian State Duma considered, but refused to accept, a
bill proposed by deputies of the Rodina faction on amendments to the
previously adopted constitutional law "On the procedure for admitting to
Russia and forming a new subject of the Russian Federation within it."
According to the bill, former Soviet autonomies could become part of Russia
based on the will of the people living in this territory without concluding an
international treaty with the post-Soviet state they are a part of. According
to Dmitry Rogozin, Andrey Savelyev, and Natalia Narochnitskaya, who prepared
the bill, this could solve the problems of Transnistria, Abkhazia, and South
Ossetia.

According to Andrei Savelyev, the bill could "correct historical injustice":
during the collapse of the USSR, the republican authorities ("small
metropolises") did not hold referendums on secession from the USSR in the
autonomous entities (future unrecognized states), thus violating the 1977
Constitution of the Soviet Union in force at that time, and referendums on the
independence of the "small metropolises" did not take place in the autonomies
themselves. However, the bill received negative opinions from the State Duma
Committees on International Affairs and Federation Affairs and Regional
Policy. During the voting, Rodina's initiative was supported only by the
Communist Party of the Russian Federation. The Liberal Democratic Party of
Russia and United Russia refused to participate in the vote.

In 2005, after much bickering, Russia agreed to the Georgian plan for
resolving the Georgian–Ossetian conflict and to Viktor Yushchenko's "road map"
for resolving the Transnistria conflict, which was called a turning point in
Russian policy towards the CIS-2. A meeting of the heads of the Republic of
Abkhazia, the Pridnestrovian Moldavian Republic, and South Ossetia was planned
for 22 April 2005. According to Valeriy Litskai, the head of the Transnistrian
Foreign Ministry, "The meeting is dictated by the changing political
situation, in particular plans for the expansion of GUAM. <…> I think that
GUAM will receive an adequate response from CIS-2." At the last moment, the
summit was postponed to July.

### 2006–present

On 17 June 2007, the four-state Community for Democracy and Peoples' Rights
signed in Tiraspol—the capital of Transnistria—the joint Declaration on
principles of peaceful and fair settlement of the Abkhazian–Georgian, Nagorno-
Karabakh–Azeri, Georgian–Ossetian, and Moldovan–Transnistrian conflicts. It
calls for barring all types of pressure, such as military deployments,
diplomatic isolation, economic blockades, or information wars, during
negotiations toward resolution of conflicts. It also calls for external
guarantees to eventual political settlements of these conflicts.

On 27 September 2009 three members of the Community for Democracy and Peoples'
Rights (all but Nagorno-Karabakh) agreed to abolish the visa regimes for their
citizens. The agreement came into effect one month after its ratification by
all three parliaments. It lasted for five years, after which it was
automatically extended for another five-year term.

As of 2017, the four member states had a combined population of 947,480
people. Abkhazia and South Ossetia have secured recognition from UN member
states such as Nauru, Nicaragua, Russia, Syria, and Venezuela, as well as the
Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic. Meanwhile, political leaders of Abkhazia,
South Ossetia, and Transnistria have all promised to integrate their economies
and perhaps seek membership in the Russian-led Eurasian Economic Union.

On 19 September 2023, Azerbaijan launched a military offensive against Artsakh
and regained control over the entire territory. While Artsakh effectively
ceased to exist, its authorities went into exile in Yerevan, Armenia.

## Member states

### Current

  * Abkhazia
  * South Ossetia
  * Pridnestrovian Moldavian Republic (Transnistria)

### Former

  * Artsakh (2007–2024)

## Administrative centres

### Current

  * Sukhumi, Abkhazia
  * Tiraspol, Transnistria
  * Tskhinvali, South Ossetia

### Former

  * Stepanakert, Artsakh