Eurasian intergovernmental organization

| This article **needs additional citations forverification**. Please help
improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced
material may be challenged and removed.  
_Find sources:_ "Commonwealth of Independent States" – news **·** newspapers
**·** books **·** scholar **·** JSTOR _( May 2023)__(Learn how and when to
remove this message)_  
---|---  
  
The **Commonwealth of Independent States** (**CIS**) is a regional
intergovernmental organization in Eurasia. It was formed following the
dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991. It covers an area of 20,368,759 km2
(7,864,422 sq mi) and has an estimated population of 246,200,194. The CIS
encourages cooperation in economic, political, and military affairs and has
certain powers relating to the coordination of trade, finance, lawmaking, and
security, including cross-border crime prevention.

As the Soviet Union disintegrated, Belarus, Russia, and Ukraine signed the
Belovezha Accords on 8 December 1991, declaring that the Union had effectively
ceased to exist and proclaimed the CIS in its place. On 21 December, the Alma-
Ata Protocol was signed, but Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania chose not to
participate. Georgia withdrew its membership in 2008 following a war with
Russia. Ukraine formally ended its participation in CIS statutory bodies in
2018, although it had stopped participating in the organization in 2014
following the Russian annexation of Crimea. Following the 2022 Russian
invasion of Ukraine, Moldova voiced its intention to progressively withdraw
from the CIS institutional framework.

Eight of the nine CIS member states participate in the CIS Free Trade Area.
Three organizations originated from the CIS, namely the Collective Security
Treaty Organization, the Eurasian Economic Union (alongside subdivisions, the
Eurasian Customs Union and the Eurasian Economic Space); and the Union State.
While the first and the second are military and economic alliances, the third
aims to reach a supranational union of Russia and Belarus with a common
government and currency.

## History and structure

### Background

Signing of the Belovezh Accords, 8 December 1991

The CIS as a shared Russophone social, cultural, and economic space has its
origins in the Russian Empire, which was replaced in 1917 by the Russian
Republic after the February Revolution earlier that year. Following the
October Revolution, the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic became
the leading republic in the Soviet Union (USSR) upon its creation with the
1922 Treaty and Declaration of the Creation of the USSR along with
Byelorussian SSR, Ukrainian SSR and Transcaucasian SFSR.

In March 1991, amidst Perestroika and a rising political crisis in the
country, Mikhail Gorbachev, the president of the Soviet Union, proposed a
federation by holding a referendum to preserve the Union as a union of
sovereign republics. The new treaty signing never happened as the Communist
Party hardliners staged an attempted coup in Moscow in August that year.

### Founding

The Agreement on the Creation of the Commonwealth of Independent States dated
8 December 1991. The information from the depository of the international
agreement published on the Unified Register of Legal Acts and Other Documents
of the Commonwealth of Independent States (under the executive committee of
the Commonwealth of Independent States) as of 2024. The Protocol to the
Agreement on the Creation of the Commonwealth of Independent States dated 21
December 1991. The information from the depository of the international
agreement published on the Unified Register of Legal Acts and Other Documents
of the Commonwealth of Independent States (under the executive committee of
the Commonwealth of Independent States) as of 2024.

Following the events of the failed 1991 coup, many republics of the USSR
declared their independence fearing another coup. A week after the Ukrainian
independence referendum was held, which kept the chances of the Soviet Union
staying together low, the Commonwealth of Independent States was founded in
its place on 8 December 1991 by the Byelorussian SSR, the Russian SFSR, and
the Ukrainian SSR, when the leaders of the three republics met at the
Belovezhskaya Pushcha Natural Reserve, about 50 km (31 mi) north of Brest in
Belarus, and signed the "Agreement Establishing the Commonwealth of
Independent States", known as the Belovezh Accords (Russian: Беловежские
соглашения, romanized:  _Belovezhskiye soglasheniya_).

The CIS announced that the new organization would be open to all republics of
the former Soviet Union and to other nations sharing the same goals. The CIS
charter stated that all the members were sovereign and independent nations and
thereby effectively abolished the Soviet Union. On 21 December 1991, the
leaders of eight additional former Soviet Republics (Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Turkmenistan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan)
signed the Alma-Ata Protocol which can either be interpreted as expanding the
CIS to these states or the proper foundation or foundation date of the CIS,
thus bringing the number of participating countries to 11. Georgia joined two
years later, in December 1993. At this point, 12 of the 15 former Soviet
Republics participated in the CIS, the three non-participants being the Baltic
states, which were occupied by the Soviet Union. The CIS and Soviet Union also
legally co-existed briefly with each other until 26 December 1991, when the
Soviet of the Republics formally dissolved the Soviet Union. This was followed
by Ivan Korotchenya becoming Executive Secretary of the CIS on the same day.

After the end of the dissolution process of the Soviet Union, Russia and the
Central Asian republics were weakened economically and faced declines in GDP.
Post-Soviet states underwent economic reforms and privatisation. The process
of Eurasian integration began immediately after the break-up of the Soviet
Union to salvage economic ties with Post-Soviet republics.

### CIS Charter

The 20–22 June 2000 CIS Summit

On 22 January 1993, the Charter (Statutes) of the CIS was signed, setting up
the different institutions of the CIS, their functions, and the rules and
statutes of the CIS. The Charter also defined that all countries that have
ratified the Agreement on the Establishment of the CIS and its relevant (Alma-
Ata) Protocol would be considered to be founding states of the CIS, with only
those countries ratifying the Charter being considered to be member states of
the CIS (art. 7). Other states can participate as associate members or
observers if accepted as such by a decision of the Council of Heads of State
to the CIS (art. 8).

All the founding states apart from Ukraine and Turkmenistan ratified the
Charter of the CIS and became member states of it. Nevertheless, Ukraine and
Turkmenistan kept participating in the CIS, without being member states of it.
Turkmenistan became an associate member of the CIS in August 2005. Georgia
left the CIS altogether in 2009 and Ukraine stopped participating in 2018.

### General secretary

The work of CIS is coordinated by the general secretary.

General secretaries  Name  | Term   
---|---  
/  Ivan Korotchenya | 14 May 1993 – 29 April 1998   
Boris Berezovsky | 29 April 1998 – 4 March 1999   
Ivan Korotchenya | 4 March 1999 – 2 April 1999   
Yury Yarov | 2 April 1999 – 14 July 2004   
Vladimir Rushailo | 14 July 2004 – 5 October 2007   
Sergei Lebedev | 5 October 2007 – present   
  
### Interparliamentary Assembly

The Interparliamentary Assembly was established on 27 March 1992 in
Kazakhstan. On 26 May 1995, the CIS leaders signed the Convention on the
Interparliamentary Assembly of Member Nations of the Commonwealth of
Independent States eventually ratified by nine parliaments, the only CIS
member not signing was Georgia. Under the terms of the convention, the
InterParliamentary Assembly (IPA) was invested with international legitimacy.

It is housed in the Tauride Palace in St Petersburg and acts as the
consultative parliamentary wing of the CIS, created to discuss problems of
parliamentary cooperation, review draft documents of common interest, and pass
model laws to the national legislatures in the CIS (as well as
recommendations) for their use in the preparation of new laws and amendments
to existing legislation. More than 130 documents have been adopted that ensure
the convergence of laws in the CIS at the level of national legislation. The
Assembly is actively involved in the development of integration processes in
the CIS and also sends observers to the national elections. The Assembly held
its 32nd Plenary meeting in Saint Petersburg on 14 May 2009.

### Further developments

Between 2003 and 2005, three CIS member states experienced a change of
government in a series of colour revolutions: Eduard Shevardnadze was
overthrown in Georgia; Viktor Yushchenko was elected in Ukraine; and Askar
Akayev was toppled in Kyrgyzstan.

In February 2006, Georgia withdrew from the Council of Defense Ministers, with
the statement that "Georgia has taken a course to join NATO and it cannot be
part of two military structures simultaneously", but it remained a full member
of the CIS until August 2009, one year after officially withdrawing in the
immediate aftermath of the Russo-Georgian War.

In March 2007, Igor Ivanov, the secretary of the Russian Security Council,
expressed his doubts concerning the usefulness of the CIS, emphasizing that
the Eurasian Economic Community was becoming a more competent organization to
unify the largest countries of the CIS. Following the withdrawal of Georgia,
the presidents of Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, and Turkmenistan skipped the October
2009 meeting of the CIS, each having their own issues and disagreements with
the Russian Federation.

In May 2009, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Moldova, and Ukraine
joined the Eastern Partnership (EaP), a project that was initiated by the
European Union (EU). The EaP framework governs the EU's relationship with the
post-Soviet states of Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Moldova, and
Ukraine.

## Membership

There are nine full member states of the Commonwealth of Independent States.

The Creation Agreement remained the main constituent document of the CIS until
January 1993, when the CIS Charter (Russian: Устав, romanized:  _Ustav_) was
adopted. The charter formalized the concept of membership: a member country is
defined as a country that ratifies the CIS Charter (sec. 2, art. 7).
Additional members can join with the consent of all current members. Parties
that ratified the Creation Agreement before the adoption of the Charter are
considered to be "Founding states", but not members.

### Member states

Country  | Signed  | Agreement ratified | Charter ratified  | Notes   
---|---|---|---|---  
Armenia | 21 December 1991 | 18 February 1992 | 16 March 1994 | Founding state. Signatory of the Alma-Ata Protocol   
Azerbaijan | 21 December 1991 | 24 September 1993 | 14 December 1993 | Signatory of the Alma-Ata Protocol.   
Belarus | 8 December 1991 | 10 December 1991 | 18 January 1994 | Founding state. Signatory of both the Belovezha Accords and the Alma-Ata Protocol.   
Kazakhstan | 21 December 1991 | 23 December 1991 | 20 April 1994 | Founding state. Signatory of the Alma-Ata Protocol.   
Kyrgyzstan | 21 December 1991 | 6 March 1992 | 12 April 1994 | Founding state. Signatory of the Alma-Ata Protocol.   
Moldova | 21 December 1991 | 8 April 1994 | 27 June 1994 | Signatory of the Alma-Ata Protocol.  
Active participation in CIS ceased in November 2022. Just in economic, social
protection, healthcare agreements.  
Russia | 8 December 1991 | 12 December 1991 | 20 July 1993 | Founding state. Signatory of both the Belovezha Accords and the Alma-Ata Protocol.   
Tajikistan | 21 December 1991 | 26 June 1993 | 14 August 1993 | Signatory of the Alma-Ata Protocol.   
Uzbekistan | 21 December 1991 | 4 January 1992 | 9 February 1994 | Founding state. Signatory of the Alma-Ata Protocol.   
  
#### Moldova

In light of Russia's support for the independence of occupied regions within
Moldova, Georgia, and Ukraine as well as its violation of the Istanbul
Agreement (see Adapted Conventional Armed Forces in Europe Treaty),
legislative initiatives to denounce the agreement on the creation of CIS were
tabled in Moldova's parliament on 25 March 2014, though they were not
approved. A similar bill was proposed in January 2018.

On 14 June 2022, Moldovan Minister of Foreign Affairs Nicu Popescu said the
Moldovan government was considering the prospect of leaving the CIS, although
at the end of May President Maia Sandu had said the country would not leave
for the time being. An August 2021 poll conducted in Moldova (prior to the
start of Russia's invasion of Ukraine) found that 48.1% of respondents
supported Moldova's withdrawal from the CIS.

On 30 November 2022, Popescu stated that Moldova will suspend its
participation in CIS meetings, and on 23 February 2023 stated that Moldova has
started withdrawing from multiple treaties that the country had signed with
the CIS, as his country aims to join the European Union. On 15 May 2023, the
President of the Parliament of Moldova, Igor Grosu, stated the country will
withdraw from the agreement establishing the CIS Interparliamentary Assembly;
he argued that being in the CIS "did not protect the Republic of Moldova from
energy blackmail in the middle of winter, from threats and official statements
hostile to the independence and sovereignty of the Republic of Moldova".

As part of the process to severing connections with the CIS, in July 2023
Moldova passed a law on denunciation of the agreement on Moldova's membership
in the Inter-Parliamentary Assembly of the CIS countries. 70 agreements were
denounced by October 2023, from the total of around 282 signed by Moldova.

In December 2023, Moldova announced its intention to withdraw from the CIS
entirely by the end of 2024. It was later stated that Moldova would pull out
of everything except for economic, social protection, and healthcare
agreements.

A 22–27 May 2024 poll showed that 40.5% of Moldovans were in favor of leaving
the CIS and 35.5% were against, with 41.9% in favor and 32% against in a 16–28
April 2025 poll.

### Associate member

A country can become an associate member under the CIS Charter (sec. 2, art.
8) if approved by the Council of Heads of States. Participation of associate
members and of the observers in the work of the Commonwealth organs shall be
governed by their rules of procedures.

Country  | Signed  | Agreement ratified  | Charter ratified  | Associate from  | Notes   
---|---|---|---|---|---  
Turkmenistan | 21 December 1991 | 26 December 1991 | Not ratified  | August 2005  | Founding state. Signatory of the Alma-Ata Protocol. Has never been a full member.   
  
Two states, Ukraine and Turkmenistan ratified the CIS Creation Agreement
before the adoption of the CIS Charter in January 1993, making them "founding
states of the CIS", but did not ratify the Charter itself that would make them
full members. These states, while not being formal members of the CIS, were
allowed to participate in CIS. They were also allowed to participate in
various CIS initiatives, e.g. the Free Trade Area, which were, however,
formulated mostly as independent multilateral agreements, and not as internal
CIS agreements.

Turkmenistan has not ratified the Charter and therefore is not formally a
member of the CIS. Nevertheless, it has consistently participated in the CIS
as if it were a member state.

Turkmenistan changed its CIS standing to associate member as of 26 August
2005. The cited reason was to be consistent with its 1995-proclaimed, UN-
recognised, international neutrality status, but experts have cited the
country no longer needing Russia to provide natural gas access, as well as the
country's declining faith in the confederation's ability to maintain internal
stability in light of the Colour Revolutions.

### Founding state

The Verkhovna Rada never ratified the agreement on membership of the CIS in
accordance with the CIS Charter so Ukraine never became a member.

Ukraine did not apply to become an Associate member, nor was it granted by the
Council of Heads of States, accordingly Ukraine remained just a Founding
state.

Ukraine did participate in the CIS and became an associate member of the CIS
Economic Union in 1994, and signed the Commonwealth of Independent States Free
Trade Area in 2011.

Ukraine withdrew its representatives from the CIS in May 2018 and stopped
actively participating in the CIS. However, the country remained a party to a
number of agreements, such as the free trade area.

Country  | Signed  | Agreement ratified | Charter ratified | Notes   
---|---|---|---|---  
Ukraine | 8 December 1991 | 10 December 1991 | Not ratified  | Founding state. Signatory of both the Belovezha Accords and the Alma-Ata Protocol. Has never been a full member. 

  * Largely ceased to participate from 2014
  * Withdrew its representatives in May 2018
  * Denounced various CIS treaties as of 2024
  * Has not formally withdrawn from the Creation Agreement, thus it continues to be recognised as a founder.

  
Representatives of Ukraine, Russia, Belarus, Kazakhstan and other states at
the 20–22 June 2000 CIS Summit in Moscow

Although Ukraine was one of the states which ratified the Creation Agreement
in December 1991, making it a Founding State of the CIS, it chose not to
ratify the CIS Charter as it disagrees with Russia being the only legal
successor state to the Soviet Union. Thus it has never been a full member of
the CIS. However, Ukraine had kept participating in the CIS, with the consent
of the Council of Heads of States, even though it was not a member. Ukraine
has never applied for, or been granted, Associate member status.

Following the start of the Russo-Ukrainian war in February 2014, relations
between Ukraine and Russia deteriorated, leading Ukraine to consider ending
its participation in the CIS. As Ukraine never ratified the Charter, it could
cease its informal participation in the CIS. However, to fully terminate its
relationship with the CIS, it would need to legally withdraw from the Creation
Agreement, as Georgia did previously. On 14 March 2014, a bill was introduced
to Ukraine's parliament to denounce their ratification of the CIS Creation
Agreement, but it was never approved. Following the 2014 parliamentary
election, a new bill to denounce the CIS agreement was introduced. In
September 2015, the Ukrainian Ministry of Foreign Affairs confirmed Ukraine
will continue taking part in the CIS "on a selective basis". Since that month,
Ukraine has had no representatives in the CIS Executive Committee building.

In April 2018, Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko indicated that Ukraine
would formally leave the CIS. On 19 May 2018, Poroshenko signed a decree
formally ending Ukraine's participation in CIS statutory bodies.

As of 1 June 2018, the CIS secretariat had not received formal notice from
Ukraine of its withdrawal from the CIS, a process that would take one year to
complete, following notice being given. The CIS secretariat stated that it
will continue inviting Ukraine to participate. Ukraine has stated that it
intends to review its participation in all CIS agreements and only continue in
those that are in its interests. On 3 May 2023 Ukraine formally withdrew from
the 1992 agreement that set up the CIS Interparliamentary Assembly. In 2023
and 2024 Ukraine also withdrew from a number of agreements including the 2001
_Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) agreement on cooperation in the
provision of safety of hazardous industrial facilities_ , the 1996 _CIS
agreement on cooperation in evacuating nationals from third countries in
emergencies_ , the 1992 _Agreement between the State Parties of the
Commonwealth of Independent States on social and legal guarantees of the
military personnel, persons discharged from military service, and members of
their families_ , the 1992 _Agreement on the Establishment of the Council of
Commanders of the Border Troops_ and the _Agreement on the Creation of the
Interstate System of Documentary Encrypted Communications of the Commonwealth
of Independent States_.

### Former member states

Country  | Signed  | Agreement ratified | Charter ratified | Withdrawn  | Effective  | Notes   
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
Georgia | 3 December 1993 | 3 December 1993 | 19 April 1994 | 18 August 2008 | 18 August 2009 | Withdrew as a result of the Russo-Georgian War of 2008.   
  
Following the overthrow of Eduard Shevardnadze in Georgia, Georgia officially
withdrew from the Council of Defense Ministers in February 2006, stating that
"Georgia has taken a course to join NATO and it cannot be part of two military
structures simultaneously". However, it remained a full member of the CIS.

In the aftermath of the Russo-Georgian War in 2008, President Saakashvili
announced during a public speech in the capital city Tbilisi that Georgia
would leave the CIS and the Georgian Parliament voted unanimously on 14 August
2008 to withdraw from the regional organization. On 18 August 2008 the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Georgia sent a note to the CIS Executive
Committee notifying it of the aforesaid resolutions of the Parliament of
Georgia and Georgia's withdrawal from CIS. In accordance with the CIS Charter
(sec. 1, art. 9), Georgia's withdrawal came into effect 12 months later, on 18
August 2009.

## Politics

Meeting of CIS leaders in Bishkek, 2008

### Human rights

Since its inception, one of the primary goals of the CIS has been to provide a
forum for discussing issues related to the social and economic development of
the newly independent states. To achieve this goal member states have agreed
to promote and protect human rights. Initially, efforts to achieve this goal
consisted merely of statements of goodwill, but on 26 May 1995, the CIS
adopted a Commonwealth of Independent States Convention on Human Rights and
Fundamental Freedoms.

In 1991, four years before the 1995 human rights treaty, article 33 of the
Charter of the CIS created a Human Rights Commission with its seat in Minsk,
Belarus. This was confirmed by the decision of the Council of Heads of States
of the CIS in 1993. In 1995, the CIS adopted a human rights treaty that
includes civil and political as well as social and economic human rights. This
treaty entered into force in 1998. The CIS treaty is modelled on the European
Convention on Human Rights, but lacking the strong implementation mechanisms
of the latter. In the CIS treaty, the Human Rights Commission has very vaguely
defined authority. The Statute of the Human Rights Commission, however, also
adopted by the CIS Member States as a decision, gives the commission the right
to receive inter-state as well as individual communications.[_citation
needed_]

CIS members, especially in Central Asia, continue to have among the world's
poorest human rights records. Many activists point to examples such as the
2005 Andijan massacre in Uzbekistan to show that there has been almost no
improvement in human rights since the collapse of the Soviet Union in Central
Asia. The consolidation of power by President Vladimir Putin has resulted in a
steady decline in the modest progress of previous years in Russia. In turn,
this has led to little to no scrutiny by Russia when it comes to the situation
of human rights in other CIS member states. The Commonwealth of Independent
States continues to face serious challenges in meeting even basic
international standards.

### Military

The members of the Council of Ministers of Defense meeting in Moscow in 2017

The CIS Charter establishes the Council of Ministers of Defence, which is
vested with the task of coordinating military cooperation of the CIS member
states who wish to participate.

In May 1992, six post-Soviet states belonging to the CIS signed the Collective
Security Treaty (also referred to as the Tashkent Pact or Tashkent Treaty).
Three other post-Soviet states signed in 1993 and the treaty took effect in
1994 and lasted 5 years. When the treaty was subsequently renewed, three
countries withdrew, leaving Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Russia,
and Tajikistan as members.

In December 1993, the CIS Armed Forces Headquarters was abolished. Instead,
"the CIS Council of Defence Ministers created a CIS Military Cooperation
Coordination Headquarters (MCCH) in Moscow, with 50 percent of the funding
provided by Russia." General Viktor Samsonov was appointed as Chief of Staff.
The headquarters has now moved to 101000, Москва (Moscow), Сверчков переулок,
3/2.

An important manifestation of integration processes in the area of military
and defence collaboration of the CIS member states is the creation, in 1995,
of the joint CIS Air Defense System. Over the years, the military personnel of
the joint CIS Air Defense System grew twofold along the western, European
border of the CIS, and by 1.5 times on its southern borders.

In 2002, the six member states agreed to create the _Collective Security
Treaty Organisation_ (CSTO) as a military alliance.

In 2007, CSTO members agreed to create a CSTO peacekeeping force.[_citation
needed_]

One of the CST's original objectives was to resolve conflicts between CIS
members, however military conflicts such as Russia's open assistance and
support to the two secessionist areas in Georgia, Russia seizing Crimea and
support to secessionist areas in Ukraine, the conflict between Armenia and
Azerbaijan, and Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan border issues have demonstrated how
ineffective the CST and later the CSTO, is in this role.

## Economy

Corruption and bureaucracy are serious problems for trade in CIS countries.

Kazakhstan's President Nursultan Nazarbayev proposed that CIS members take up
a digitization agenda to modernize CIS economies.

**Economic data**

Country  | Population (2021)  | GDP (USD million)  | GDP growth  
(2012)  | GDP per capita  | Human Development  
Index (2019)  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
2007  | 2012  | 2022  | 2007  | 2012  | 2020  | 2022   
Armenia  | 2,790,974  | 9,204  | 10,551  | 13,679  | 2.1%  | 2,996  | 3,500  | 4,268  | 4,888  | 0.776   
Azerbaijan  | 10,312,992  | 33,049  | 71,043  | 76,123  | 3.8%  | 3,829  | 7,500  | 4,214  | 4,665  | 0.756   
Belarus  | 9,578,167  | 45,275  | 65,685  | 78,276  | 4.3%  | 4,656  | 6,940  | 6,411  | 6,830  | 0.823   
Kazakhstan  | 19,196,465  | 104,849  | 196,642  | 210,896  | 5.2%  | 6,805  | 11,700  | 9,122  | 10,240  | 0.825   
Kyrgyzstan  | 6,527,743  | 3,802  | 6,197  | 7,543  | 0.8%  | 711  | 1,100  | 1,174  | 1,265  | 0.697   
Moldova  | 3,061,506  | 4,401  | 7,589  | 8,947  | 4.4%  | 1,200  | 2,100  | 4,551  | 4,850  | 0.750   
Russia  | 145,102,755  | 1,294,381  | 2,022,000  | 2,103,400  | 3.4%  | 9,119  | 14,240  | 10,127  | 10,890  | 0.824   
Tajikistan  | 9,750,064  | 3,695  | 7,263  | 8,456  | 2.1%  | 526  | 960  | 859  | 915  | 0.668   
Uzbekistan  | 34,081,449  | 22,355  | 63,622  | 70,452  | 4.1%  | 831  | 2,137  | 1,686  | 1,820  | 0.720   
  
### Standards and rules

GOST standards were originally developed by the government of the Soviet Union
as part of its national standardization strategy. After the disintegration of
the USSR, the GOST standards acquired a new status of the regional standards.
They are now administered by the Euro-Asian Council for Standardization,
Metrology, and Certification (EASC), a standards organization chartered by the
Commonwealth of Independent States.

### Supranational integration initiatives, trade, and economic cooperation
within CIS

On 24 September 1993, an _Agreement on the Economic Union_ was signed by the
heads of a number of CIS states. Its aim was the forming of conditions of
stable development of economies of Contracting Parties to benefit from
increases in living standards of their population. This led to other specific
agreements.

The terms of the CIS FTA agreements allow member states to enter into the FTA
agreements with other countries, as well as to join/create custom unions. Like
other Commonwealth of Independent States agreements, this agreement does not
regulate relations with third countries and allows differentiated integration
(aka à la carte and multi-speed Europe).

#### 1994 Framework for Bilateral Free Trade Agreements and Freedom of Transit

1994 agreement signatories

On 15 April 1994, at a meeting of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS)
Council of Heads of State in Moscow, the presidents of 12 countries, namely
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova,
Russia, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, and Ukraine signed an
_Agreement_ on the Establishment of a Free Trade Area (Соглашение о создании
зоны свободной торговли). The Agreement entered into force on 30 December 1994
for those countries that had completed ratification. As of 2023, the Agreement
is fully in force for Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan and Ukraine, while Russia and
Turkmenistan have notified the application of the Agreement on a provisional
basis. According to the executive committee of the Commonwealth of Independent
States, no one has ceased participation in the Agreement, made reservations or
suspended the application.

Bilateral FTAs concluded on the basis of CIS 1994 as a framework agreement.
According to the analytical material of the executive committee of the
Commonwealth of Independent States, the 1994 version has not yet provided for
multilateral free trade, but the conclusion of many bilateral agreements.
Under the 1994 version, the free trade regime enters into force when
conditions are met, but, for example, the freedom of transit enters into force
immediately between participants. According to the text, transit
transportation should not be subject to unreasonable delays or restrictions,
and the conditions of transit, including tariffs for transportation by any
mode of transport and the provision of services, should not be worse than for
domestic shippers, recipients, and owners of goods, as well as no worse than
the conditions for any third country.

#### 1999 Protocol introducing a multilateral free trade among ten countries

On 2 April 1999, in Moscow, the presidents of 11 countries, namely Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Russia,
Tajikistan, Uzbekistan and Ukraine signed a Protocol on Amendments and
Additions to the Agreement on the Establishment of a Free Trade Area of 15
April 1994 (Протокол о внесении изменений и дополнений в Соглашение о создании
зоны свободной торговли от 15 апреля 1994 года). Turkmenistan did not
participate. The Protocol entered into force on 24 November 1999 for those
countries that had completed ratification. As of 2023, the Protocol has
entered into force for all countries, namely Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus,
Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, and Ukraine,
except Russia, which remains a signatory but has not notified entry into force
or provisional application. According to the executive committee of the
Commonwealth of Independent States, no one has ceased participation in the
Protocol or suspended the application, while one reservation was made by
Azerbaijan on non-application in relation to Armenia and two specific opinions
were expressed by Georgia and Ukraine.

According to the analytical material of the executive committee of the
Commonwealth of Independent States, the 1999 Protocol replaced the existing
bilateral free trade regime with a multilateral regime, eliminated all fees,
as well as taxes and levies with equivalent effect, and quantitative
restrictions on the import and export of goods in mutual trade of the FTA
participating states, established a procedure for dispute resolution, etc. The
1999 version refers to the principles of the World Trade Organisation,
envisages cooperation in economic policy, payments, customs cooperation,
taxes, science, provides for a ratchet effect prohibiting the imposition of
new tariffs and restrictions, provides for treatment no worse than that of any
third country, and provides for the transit of goods on the basis of the
principle of freedom of transit without discrimination.

The 2011 CIS FTA Treaty envisages that the 1994 agreement and the 1999
protocol no longer apply among its eight participants (Russia, Ukraine,
Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Armenia, and Moldova), however,
among the rest of the countries, they continue to be applied.

International Trade Centre says the 1994 Agreement on the Establishment of a
Free Trade Area signed by 12 CIS countries still continues to be used by
Azerbaijan and Georgia in trade with other CIS countries except with Russia
and Turkmenistan. Reportedly it is also used bilaterally between Uzbekistan
and Tajikistan pending Tajikistan's ratification of Uzbekistan's accession to
the 2011 CIS Free Trade Area Treaty.

#### 2011 multilateral Free Trade Area Treaty among 9 countries

Stamp of 1991–2011, the Commonwealth of Independent States 2011 treaty
signatories and parties

In 2009, a new agreement was begun to create an FTA, the CIS Free Trade
Agreement (CISFTA).[_citation needed_] In October 2011, the new free trade
agreement was signed by eight of the eleven CIS prime ministers; Armenia,
Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Russia, Tajikistan, and Ukraine at a
meeting in St. Petersburg. Initially, the treaty was only ratified by Russia,
Belarus, and Ukraine, However, by the end of 2012, Kazakhstan, Armenia, and
Moldova had also completed ratification. In December 2013, Uzbekistan, signed
and then ratified the treaty, while the remaining two signatories, Kyrgyzstan
and Tajikistan later both ratified the treaty in January 2014 and December
2015 respectively. Azerbaijan is the only full CIS member state not to
participate in the free trade area.

The free trade agreement eliminates export and import duties on several goods
but also contains a number of exemptions that will ultimately be phased
out.[_citation needed_] An agreement was also signed on the basic principles
of currency regulation and currency controls in the CIS at the same October
2011 meeting.[_citation needed_]

#### 2023 Agreement on Free Trade in Services among 7 countries

In Sochi on 8 June 2023, Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Russia,
Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan signed an Agreement on Free Trade in Services,
Establishment, Operations, and Investment.

## Social development of the CIS countries

Statistics show that, as of 2011, the CIS countries as a whole represent a
zone of social disadvantage.. It should be borne in mind that the subjective
level of poverty, determined on the basis of sociological surveys, often turns
out to be significantly higher than the official indicator: for example, the
subjective level of poverty in Ukraine is 42%, and the official level is 28%;
in Russia, the difference is even greater — 42% and 13%, respectively. %.

At the end of December 2015, unemployment benefits were received by 1% of
registered unemployed in Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan, 5% in Azerbaijan, 8% in
Moldova, 45% in Belarus, 81% in Ukraine and 85% in Russia. Its average amount
was 262.3 manats ($201) in Azerbaijan, 216,424 white rubles ($12) in Belarus,
1,255.8 lei ($63) in Moldova, 306.9 somoni ($46) in Tajikistan (November
2015), and 1,444 hryvnia ($60) in Ukraine. The minimum unemployment benefit in
Russia is set at 850 rubles (in December, $12), and the maximum is 4,900
rubles ($70). In a number of countries in the region, the allowance has not
changed for many years with an increase in the cost of living.

The average monthly salary in dollars in 2015 was $142 in Tajikistan, $193 in
Ukraine, $206 in Kyrgyzstan, $245 in Moldova, $386 in Armenia, $413 in
Belarus, $445 in Georgia (Q4 2015), $452 in Azerbaijan, and $560 in Russia $,
Kazakhstan — $ 565. It still remains low, insufficient to ensure a full-
fledged human life, and is actually completely "eaten up." In a number of
countries, the majority of the population spends more than half of their
salary on food (56% of the population in Kazakhstan, 61% in Russia, 72% in
Belarus, 76% in Azerbaijan and Ukraine). With a low salary level, delays in
its payment are increasing..:

## Other activities

### Election monitoring

The CIS-Election Monitoring Organisation (Russian: Миссия наблюдателей от СНГ
на выборах) is an election monitoring body that was formed in October 2002,
following a Commonwealth of Independent States heads of states meeting which
adopted the _Convention on the Standards of Democratic Elections, Electoral
Rights, and Freedoms in the Member States of the Commonwealth of Independent
States_. The CIS-EMO has been sending election observers to member countries
of the CIS since this time.[_citation needed_]

CIS election monitoring has been characterized by scholars as low-quality, as
the CIS tends to validate elections that are obviously flawed.

**Controversies**

The election monitoring body has approved many elections which have been
heavily criticised by independent observers.

  * The democratic nature of the final round of the 2004 Ukrainian presidential election which followed the Orange Revolution and brought into power the former opposition, was questioned by the CIS while the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) found no significant problems. This was the first time that the CIS observation teams challenged the validity of an election, saying that it should be considered illegitimate. On 15 March 2005, the Ukrainian Independent Information Agency quoted Dmytro Svystkov (a spokesman of the Ukrainian Foreign Ministry) that Ukraine had suspended its participation in the CIS election monitoring organization.[_citation needed_]
  * The CIS praised the Uzbekistan parliamentary elections, 2005 as "legitimate, free and transparent" while the OSCE had referred to the Uzbek elections as having fallen "significantly short of OSCE commitments and other international standards for democratic elections".
  * Moldovan authorities refused to invite CIS observers in the 2005 Moldovan parliamentary elections, an action Russia criticised. Many dozens of such observers from Belarus and Russia were stopped from reaching Moldova.
  * CIS observers monitored the Tajikistan parliamentary elections, in 2005 and in the end declared them "legal, free and transparent." The same elections were pronounced by the OSCE to have failed international standards for democratic elections.[_citation needed_]
  * Soon after CIS observers hailed the Kyrgyz parliamentary elections of 2005 as "well-organized, free, and fair", as large-scale and often violent demonstrations broke out throughout the country protesting what the opposition called a rigged parliamentary election. In contrast, the OSCE reported that the elections fell short of international standards in many areas.
  * International observers of the Interparliamentary Assembly stated the 2010 local elections in Ukraine were organised well. While the Council of Europe uncovered a number of problems in relation to a new electorate law approved just prior to the elections and the Obama administration criticised the conduct of the elections, saying they "did not meet standards for openness and fairness".

### Russian language status

Russia has urged that the Russian language receive official status in all of
the CIS member states. So far Russian is an official language in only four
states: Russia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Kyrgyzstan. Russian is also
considered an official language in the region of Transnistria and the
autonomous region of Gagauzia in Moldova. After the Ukrainian 2010 election,
President Yanukovych stated "Ukraine will continue to promote the Ukrainian
language as its only state language."

### Sports events

At the time of the Soviet Union's dissolution in December 1991, its sports
teams had been invited to or qualified for various 1992 sports events. A joint
CIS team took its place in some of these. The "Unified Team" competed in the
1992 Winter Olympics and 1992 Summer Olympics, and a CIS association football
team competed in UEFA Euro 1992. A CIS bandy team played some friendlies in
January 1992 and made its last appearance at the 1992 Russian Government Cup,
where it also played against the new Russia national bandy team. The Soviet
Union bandy championship for 1991–1992 was rebranded as a CIS championship,
this lasted just one year before it became Russian bandy.

In 2017, a festival for national sports and games, known as the Festival of
National Sports and Games of the Commonwealth of Independent States (Russian:
Фестиваль национальных видов спорта и игр государств — участников Содружества
Независимых Государств) was held in Ulyanovsk. The main sports were sambo, tug
of war, mas-wrestling, gorodki, belt wrestling, lapta, bandy (rink),
kettlebell lifting, chess and archery. A few demonstration sports were also a
part of the programme.

In 2021 the first CIS games took place in Kazan with 9 nations and 2,000
athletes. The second games took place in 2023 in Belarus.

### Cultural events

The CIS has also been a relevant forum to support cultural relations between
former Soviet republics. In 2006, the Council of the Heads of Governments of
the CIS launched the Intergovernmental Foundation for Educational, Scientific,
and Cultural Cooperation (IFESCCO). IFESSCO has substantially relied on
Russia's financial support since its creation and supported several
multilateral cultural events, including the ‘CIS Capital of Culture’
initiative. In 2017, the Armenian city of Goris was declared the CIS Cultural
Capital of the year, in 2022 it was Karakol in Kyrgyzstan.

## Demographics

The combined population of all member states is 246,200,194 as of 2024.

  * v
  * t
  * e

Largest cities or towns in Commonwealth of Independent States  
Russia, Uzbekistan, Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, Belarus, Tajikistan, Kyrgyzstan  
---  
Rank  |  | Member state  | Pop.  | Rank  |  | Member state | Pop.   
1 | Moscow | Russia | 13,149,803 | 11 | Kazan | Russia | 1,318,604   
2 | Saint Petersburg | Russia | 5,597,763 | 12 | Shymkent | Kazakhstan | 1,246,661   
3 | Tashkent | Uzbekistan | 3,075,232 | 13 | Krasnoyarsk | Russia | 1,205,473   
4 | Baku | Azerbaijan | 2,300,500 | 14 | Nizhny Novgorod | Russia | 1,204,985   
5 | Almaty | Kazakhstan | 2,275,541 | 15 | Chelyabinsk | Russia | 1,177,058   
6 | Minsk | Belarus | 1,992,862 | 16 | Ufa | Russia | 1,163,304   
7 | Novosibirsk | Russia | 1,633,851 | 17 | Samara | Russia | 1,158,952   
8 | Dushanbe | Tajikistan | 1,564,700 | 18 | Bishkek | Kyrgyzstan | 1,145,044   
9 | Yekaterinburg | Russia | 1,536,183 | 19 | Rostov-on-Don | Russia | 1,140,487   
10 | Astana | Kazakhstan | 1,502,102 | 20 | Krasnodar | Russia | 1,138,654   
  
## Life expectancy

| This section needs to be **updated**. Please help update this article to
reflect recent events or newly available information. _( October 2024)_  
---|---  
  
Life expectancy at birth in the countries of CIS in 2021, according to the
World Bank Group are listed below:

Countries  | 2021  | Historical data  | COVID-19 impact   
---|---|---|---  
All  | Male  | Female  | Sex gap | 2000  | 2000  
→2014 | 2014  | 2014  
→2019  | 2019  | 2019  
→2020  | 2020  | 2020  
→2021  | 2021  | 2019  
→2021 | 2014  
→2021  
Belarus | 72.37 | 67.30 | 77.70 | 10.40 | 68.91 | 4.06 | 72.97 | 1.26 | 74.23 | −1.77 | 72.46 | −0.09 | 72.37 | −1.86 | −0.60   
Armenia | 72.04 | 66.55 | 77.35 | 10.80 | 70.62 | 3.43 | 74.06 | 1.38 | 75.44 | −3.27 | 72.17 | −0.13 | 72.04 | −3.40 | −2.02   
Kyrgyzstan | 71.90 | 67.90 | 76.10 | 8.20 | 68.56 | 1.84 | 70.40 | 1.20 | 71.60 | 0.20 | 71.80 | 0.10 | 71.90 | 0.30 | 1.50   
Tajikistan | 71.59 | 69.57 | 73.73 | 4.17 | 63.26 | 5.81 | 69.07 | 1.80 | 70.87 | −2.87 | 67.99 | 3.60 | 71.59 | 0.73 | 2.52   
Uzbekistan | 70.86 | 68.33 | 73.39 | 5.06 | 65.72 | 4.51 | 70.23 | 1.11 | 71.34 | −1.01 | 70.33 | 0.53 | 70.86 | −0.48 | 0.63   
Kazakhstan | 70.23 | 66.33 | 74.03 | 7.70 | 65.45 | 5.99 | 71.44 | 1.74 | 73.18 | −1.81 | 71.37 | −1.14 | 70.23 | −2.95 | −1.21   
Azerbaijan | 69.37 | 65.65 | 73.29 | 7.64 | 64.89 | 6.22 | 71.12 | 1.99 | 73.10 | −6.23 | 66.87 | 2.50 | 69.37 | −3.74 | −1.75   
Russia | 69.36 | 64.21 | 74.77 | 10.56 | 65.48 | 5.26 | 70.74 | 2.34 | 73.08 | −1.75 | 71.34 | −1.98 | 69.36 | −3.72 | −1.38   
Turkmenistan | 69.26 | 65.86 | 72.66 | 6.80 | 65.03 | 3.59 | 68.61 | 0.39 | 69.00 | −0.31 | 68.69 | 0.58 | 69.26 | 0.26 | 0.65   
Moldova | 68.85 | 64.44 | 73.55 | 9.10 | 66.42 | 2.61 | 69.03 | 1.90 | 70.94 | −0.77 | 70.17 | −1.32 | 68.85 | −2.09 | −0.19   
  
  * Life expectancy at birth in countries of CIS since 1960

  * Life expectancy and healthy life expectancy in countries of CIS in 2019

  * Elaboration by gender

## Post-Soviet organisations and initiatives outside CIS framework

A clickable Euler diagram showing the relationships among various
supranational organisations in the territory of the former Soviet Union

  * v
  * t
  * e

### EurAsEc and EAEU

#### Common Economic Space

After a discussion about the creation of a common economic space between the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) countries of Russia, Ukraine,
Belarus, and Kazakhstan, agreement in principle about the creation of this
space was announced after a meeting in the Moscow suburb of Novo-Ogarevo on 23
February 2003. The Common Economic Space would involve a supranational
commission on trade and tariffs that would be based in Kyiv, would initially
be headed by a representative of Kazakhstan, and would not be subordinate to
the governments of the four nations. The ultimate goal would be a regional
organization that would be open for other countries to join as well, and could
eventually lead even to a single currency.[_citation needed_]

On 22 May 2003, the _Verkhovna Rada_ (the Ukrainian Parliament) voted 266
votes in favour and 51 against the joint economic space. However, most believe
that Viktor Yushchenko's victory in the Ukrainian presidential election of
2004 was a significant blow against the project: Yushchenko had shown renewed
interest in Ukrainian membership in the European Union and such membership
would be incompatible with the envisioned common economic space.[_citation
needed_] Yushchenko's successor Viktor Yanukovych stated on 27 April 2010:
"Ukraine's entry into the Customs Union of Russia, Belarus and Kazakhstan is
not possible today, since the economic principles and the laws of the WTO do
not allow it, we develop our policy following WTO principles". Ukraine has
been a WTO member since 2008.

A Customs Union of Belarus, Kazakhstan and Russia was thus created in 2010, A
single market had been envisioned for 2012,[_citation needed_] but instead the
customs union was renamed as the Eurasian Customs Union and expanded to
include Armenia and Kyrgyzstan in 2015.

### Union State of Russia and Belarus

### Organisation of Central Asian Cooperation

Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan formed the
OCAC in 1991 as Central Asian Commonwealth (CAC).[_citation needed_] The
organisation continued in 1994 as the Central Asian Economic Union (CAEU), in
which Tajikistan and Turkmenistan did not participate. In 1998 it became the
Central Asian Economic Cooperation (CAEC), which marked the return of
Tajikistan. On 28 February 2002, it was renamed to its current name. Russia
joined on 28 May 2004. On 7 October 2005, it was decided between the member
states that Uzbekistan will join[_citation needed_] the Eurasian Economic
Community and that the organisations will merge. The organisations joined on
25 January 2006. It is not clear what will happen to the status of current
CACO observers that are not observers to EurAsEC (Georgia and Turkey).

### Community for Democracy and Rights of Nations

The post-Soviet disputed states of Abkhazia, South Ossetia, and Transnistria
are all members of the Community for Democracy and Rights of Nations which
aims to forge closer integration among the members.

### GUAM Organization for Democracy and Economic Development

The GUAM Organization for Democracy and Economic Development is a regional
organization of four post-Soviet states: Georgia, Ukraine, Azerbaijan, and
Moldova.

## Assessments and criticism

A. Elchibey, the 2nd president of Azerbaijan, called the CIS a "big collective
farm" that Russia uses to "preserve the old empire":

> A serious mistake was made during the construction of such an entity as the
> CIS. Perhaps it could have stood if it had been conceived as a Commonwealth
> of Nations of Independent States — I emphasize the word "independent", in
> which the rights of each State: Armenia, Georgia and Azerbaijana — would be
> protected. Abkhazians in Abkhazia is using Russian troops to oust the
> Georgian population. Is this a Commonwealth of Nations? Russia uses the CIS,
> trying to preserve the old empire in a new form and inventing various
> mechanisms for this. The CIS leaders have not made at least one serious
> attempt to resolve the Armenian-Azerbaijani conflict or any other conflicts
> within the territory of post-Soviet zone. I once called the CIS a big
> collective farm without rights. Such a collective farm will inevitably fall
> apart, and this, in fact, has already happened.

Russian diplomat A. Denisov does not believe that the CIS is being used by
Russia to realize imperial ambitions, to restore the USSR:

> As for the "imperial ambitions", the restoration of the USSR. The CIS is an
> organization that builds its work on the basis of consensus. Any
> participating State has the right to veto any decision. In practice, the
> principle of the so-called "moving geometry" is being implemented, when
> states decide which projects they should participate in and which not.
> Moreover, even the non-recognition of the legal personality of the CIS by
> one of the states does not prevent its participation in areas of cooperation
> beneficial to it in the Commonwealth format. I have already mentioned
> Georgia. Against this background, what imperial ambitions of Russia can we
> even talk about? It's just ridiculous.

Mikhail Krotov, a Russian scientist, government and international civil
servant, who headed the Council of the CIS Interparliamentary Assembly in
1992-2012, writes that the liquidation of the USSR and the independence of
Belarus, Russia and Ukraine through the signing of the Belovezha Accords on 8
December 1991, and then other Soviet republics, according to the Alma Ata
Declaration on 21 December 1991, were "They are directly linked to the
creation of the Commonwealth of Independent States as an interstate
association forming a common socio-economic space., a common military-
strategic space under a joint command, conducting a coordinated foreign policy
and protecting the ethnic, cultural, linguistic, etc. rights of national
minorities." Krotov emphasizes that in order to meet Ukraine halfway, the CIS
founding document significantly reduced the level of integration, limited its
scope and excluded supranational functions of the Commonwealth bodies, but
"Ukraine did not sign even such a weakened version of the CIS Charter," which,
according to the author, "grossly violated the terms of its withdrawal from
the USSR.". In this regard, Krotov agrees with Russian President Vladimir
Putin's conclusion that "Ukraine did not legally gain independence.".

American geopolitician Zbigniew Brzezinski believed that "it was Ukraine's
actions... that prevented the CIS from becoming just a new name for a more
federal USSR."

## Coins

  * The Central Bank of the Russian Federation has minted several commemorative coins dedicated to the Commonwealth of Independent States.

  * Obverse of the 1-ruble 2001 copper-nickel alloy coin

  * Reverse of a 1-ruble coin

  * Obverse of the 3-ruble 2001 silver coin of 900

  * Reverse of a 3-ruble coin

  * Obverse of the 3-ruble coin of 2011 made of 925 sterling silver

  * Reverse of a 3-ruble coin

  * In 2006, the National Bank of the Republic of Belarus issued commemorative coins "Commonwealth of Independent States. 15 years" in denominations of 1 (copper-nickel) and 20 (silver, 925) white rubles.