International organization

The **Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization** (**CTBTO**) is an
international organization that will be established upon the entry into force
of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, a Convention that outlaws
nuclear test explosions. Its seat will be in Vienna, Austria. The organization
will be tasked with verifying the ban on nuclear tests and will operate
therefore a worldwide monitoring system and may conduct on-site inspections.
The Preparatory Commission for the CTBTO, and its Provisional Technical
Secretariat, were established in 1997 and are headquartered in Vienna,
Austria.

## Status

The Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty will enter into force 180 days after
the Treaty has been ratified by 44 States, listed in Annex 2 of the Treaty,
which were designated to have a nuclear reactor or at least some advanced
level of nuclear technology. As of November 2023, 41 of these Annex 2 states
have signed the treaty and 35 have ratified. India, North Korea and Pakistan
have not signed or ratified the treaty; China, Egypt, Iran, Israel and the
United States have signed but have not ratified; while Russia signed and
ratified the treaty but subsequently withdrew its ratification prior to its
entry into force. The organization's scientific reporting claims 2.4 million
persons will eventually die from cancers developed as a result of atmospheric
atomic tests conducted between 1945 and 1980.

## Preparatory Commission

The Preparatory Commission was established in 1997 and is tasked with making
preparations for effective implementation of the Treaty, in particular by
establishing its verification regime. The main task is establishing and
provisionally operating the 337-facility International Monitoring System
(IMS), including its International Data Centre (IDC) and Global Communications
Infrastructure (GCI). The Commission is tasked also with the development of
operational manuals, including a manual to guide conduct of on-site
inspections.

## International Monitoring System (IMS) and Communications infrastructure

Radionuclide station on Schauinsland in Germany

The IMS, when completed, will consist of

  * 50 primary and 120 auxiliary **seismic monitoring stations**.
  * 11 **hydro-acoustic stations** detecting acoustic waves in the oceans.
  * 60 **infra-sound stations** using microbarographs (acoustic pressure sensors) to detect very low-frequency sound waves.
  * 80 **radionuclide stations** using air samplers to detect radioactive particles released from atmospheric explosions and/or vented from underground or under-water explosions.
  * 16 **radionuclide laboratories** for analysis of samples from the radionuclide stations.

Data from all stations are transmitted to the CTBTO International Data Centre
(IDC) in Vienna through a global private data network known as GCI, which is
largely based on satellite (VSAT) links.

States Parties will have equal and direct access to all IMS data, raw or
processed, for verification as well as civilian uses. The Preparatory
Commission has started the building and verification of the system of which as
of 2023[update] about 90% was operational.

## Consultation and Clarification (C&C)

States Parties to the Treaty are encouraged to conduct a Consultation and
Clarification process (C&C) before requesting an on-site inspection. The state
that has concerns about an ambiguous event should, whenever possible, make any
effort to clarify it through consultations with the state in whose territory
this event occurred, either directly or through the Organization.

## On Site Inspection (OSI)

If an event detected by the IMS (or by other means) raises concerns about
violation of the basic obligations of the CTBT, an OSI may be conducted to
clarify whether a nuclear explosion has taken place. Such an inspection could
take place only after entry into force of the Treaty, and would require
agreement by at least 30 of the 51 members of the CTBTO's Executive Council.
An inspection area of up to 1000 square kilometres would be searched by a team
of inspectors (up to 40). Only State Parties to the Treaty may submit a
request for an OSI.

When conducting an OSI, a number of detection techniques can be used. These
techniques include position finding, visual observation, passive seismic
measurements and radioactivity measurements including gamma radiation and
radioactive noble gases such as argon-37 and isotopes of xenon for an initial
period of up to 25 days. Further, for a continuation period of up to 60 days,
more intrusive measurements can be used on-site including active and resonance
seismic measurements as well as ground penetrating radar, gravity, and
electric and magnetic field mappings. Argon-37 field measurement is a unique
technology specially developed for the purpose of OSI. Drilling to obtain
radioactive samples from a suspected underground explosion site is also
allowed. Data collected from various methods have to be fused and interpreted
for decision making purposes. An important task of the CTBTO is to explore how
recent scientific and technical advances in these technologies can be applied
to an OSI.

## Confidence-building measures

In addition to the IMS, C&C and OSI, the verification regime of the CTBT
includes also the fourth element of Confidence-Building Measures. This
requires States Parties to the treaty to notify the Organization, if possible
in advance, of any chemical explosion using 300 tonnes or greater of TNT-
equivalent blasting material to be detonated. This is required in order to
contribute to the timely resolution of any compliance concerns and to assist
in the calibration of IMS stations.