Former alternative to the United Nations

|  | This article is part of  
a series aboutSukarno  
---|---  
**1stPresident of Indonesia**

* * *

Pre-independence

  * PNI
  * Partindo
  * PETA
  * BPUPK
    * _Pancasila_
  * PPKI
  * Indonesian National Revolution
    * Proclamation of Independence

* * *

Domestic policy

  * APRA
  * Ambon
  * Permesta
  * DI/TII
  * Three Souths Affair
  * Marhaenism
  * Guided Democracy
    * 5 July Decree
    * Nasakom
  * Monas
  * G30S
  * _Supersemar_
  * Fall
    * De-Sukarnoization

* * *

Foreign policy

  * Non-aligned movement
    * Bandung Conference
  * 1962 Asian Games
  * CONEFO
    * GANEFO
    * building
  * West Irian
    * Trikora
    * _Pepera_
  * _Konfrontasi_
    * Sunda Straits Crisis

* * *

Speeches

  * _Indonesia Menggugat_
  * _Tahun Vivere Pericoloso_

* * *

Family

  * Spouses 
    * Fatmawati
    * Dewi
  * Children 
    * Rukmini
    * Megawati
    * Rachmawati
    * Sukmawati
    * Guruh
  * Grandchildren 
    * Puan

* * *

Media and legacy

  * Grave
  * _Soekarno_
  * Seclusion house
  * Soekarno–Hatta International Airport
  * Gelora Bung Karno Stadium
  * KRI  _Bung Karno_

* * *  
  
  * v
  * t
  * e

  
  
The **Conference of the New Emerging Forces** (**CONEFO**) was an
intergovernmental organization that existed from 1965 to 1966. CONEFO was an
attempt by President Sukarno of Indonesia to create a new bloc of "emerging
countries" that would be an alternative power centre to the United Nations and
to the "old-established forces" — a category in which Sukarno included both
the United States and the Soviet Union. It was intended to build on the legacy
of the 1955 Bandung Conference and the Non-Aligned Movement, by asserting the
interests of the Third World and a neutral posture towards the Cold War.

CONEFO was officially established on 7 January 1965, after Sukarno's
government objected to Malaysia becoming a non-permanent member of the UN
Security Council, at a time of the low-level Indonesia–Malaysia confrontation
between the two countries. An angry Sukarno took Indonesia out of the UN (the
only country to have done so) and formed a rival world organization, having
taken similar steps when he created the Games of the New Emerging Forces
(GANEFO) as an alternative to the Olympic Games in 1963. Indonesia constructed
a new building complex in Jakarta to host CONEFO with the financial aid of the
People's Republic of China.

CONEFO never met before it was dissolved on 11 August 1966 by General Suharto
after ousting Sukarno from power. Indonesia rejoined the United Nations and
the CONEFO complex, now called the MPR/DPR/DPD building, became the seat of
the People's Consultative Assembly.