Inter-governmental forum

| This article **needs additional citations forverification**. Please help
improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced
material may be challenged and removed.  
_Find sources:_ "Conference on Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in
Asia" – news **·** newspapers **·** books **·** scholar **·** JSTOR _( June
2010)__(Learn how and when to remove this message)_  
---|---  
  
The **Conference on Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia**
(**CICA**) is an inter-governmental forum for enhancing cooperation towards
promoting peace, security and stability in Asia. It is a forum based on the
recognition that there is a close link between peace, security and stability
in Asia and in the rest of the world. The key idea of the Conference is based
on the priority of the indivisibility of security, joint initiative and
mutually beneficial interaction of small and large states.

The idea of convening the CICA was first proposed by Kazakhstan President
Nursultan Nazarbayev on 5 October 1992, at the 47th Session of the United
Nations General Assembly. On October 5, 2017, the CICA process celebrated its
25th anniversary.

## Background

The proposal for convening the CICA was welcomed by a number of Asian
countries. During the next seven years, a series of meetings were held among
the interested countries to discuss modalities of convening the CICA and draft
basic documents.

The first meeting of the CICA Ministers of Foreign Affairs was held on 14
September 1999 with participation of 15 Member States. _The Declaration on
Principles Guiding Relations between CICA Member States_ was adopted at this
meeting.

The first CICA summit was held on 4 June 2002 with participation of 16 Member
States and _Almaty Act_ , the charter of the CICA, was adopted. The impetus
for this meeting came from the 9-11 terrorist attacks of the previous year.
Thus, counter-terrorism became an important issue for CICA, and this theme has
run through the subsequent meetings.

At the second meeting of the Ministers of Foreign Affairs in 2004, _CICA
Catalogue of Confidence-Building Measures_ and _CICA Rules of Procedures_ were
adopted. At the second CICA Summit in 2006, it was decided to admit Thailand
and Republic of Korea as new members and to establish a permanent secretariat.
At the third meeting of Ministers of Foreign Affairs in 2008, Jordan and UAE
were admitted as new members. At the third CICA Summit in 2010, Turkey assumed
Chairmanship of CICA from the founding Chairman Kazakhstan. The third Summit
also admitted Iraq and Vietnam as new members and adopted the CICA Convention.
Bahrain and Cambodia joined CICA in 2011, Bangladesh and Qatar joined in 2014,
Sri Lanka in 2018 and Kuwait in 2022.

## Membership

Member states (28)

  * Afghanistan
  * Azerbaijan
  * Bahrain
  * Bangladesh
  * Cambodia
  * China
  * Egypt
  * India
  * Iran
  * Iraq
  * Israel
  * Jordan
  * Kazakhstan
  * Kuwait
  * Kyrgyzstan
  * Mongolia
  * Pakistan
  * Palestine
  * Qatar
  * Russia
  * Republic of Korea
  * Sri Lanka
  * Tajikistan
  * Thailand
  * Turkey
  * United Arab Emirates
  * Uzbekistan
  * Vietnam

Observer states (10)

  * Belarus
  * Indonesia
  * Japan
  * Laos
  * Malaysia
  * Philippines
  * Saudi Arabia
  * Turkmenistan
  * Ukraine
  * United States

Observer organizations (5)

  * International Organization for Migration
  * League of Arab States
  * Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe
  * Parliamentary Assembly of Turkic Speaking Countries
  * United Nations

Partner Organizations (6)

  * Assembly of People of Kazakhstan
  * Economic Cooperation Organization
  * Shanghai Cooperation Organisation
  * Regional Anti-Terrorist Structure of the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation
  * United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
  * Eurasian Economic Union

## Chairmanship

  * Kazakhstan (2002–2010)
  * Turkey (2010–2014)
  * China (2014–2018)
  * Tajikistan (2018–2020)
  * Kazakhstan (2020–2024)

## Summits

### 2002 Summit

The first CICA summit was held in Almaty on June 4, 2002. The idea was
proposed by Kazakhstan at the end of the Cold War and at the time of shifting
geopolitics, provided a timely opportunity for the Asian nations to address
modern challenges to the international peace and stability and set out the
vision to tackle them.

The fledgling forum's main purpose of bringing peace to all, including
bringing together seemingly irreconcilable countries and interests, was
immediately put to a real life test.

The CICA Summit drew spotlight of the world's attention to Almaty, provided
the background for laying the foundations for the first security organization
in Asia.

The 16 nations signed the Almaty Act, the Charter of the CICA and pledging to
work "towards promoting peace, security and stability in Asia".

The Act was signed by Chairman of the Administration of Afghanistan Hamid
Karzai, President of China Jiang Zemin, Prime Minister of India Atal Behari
Vajpayee, President of Kazakhstan Nursultan Nazarbayev, President of
Kyrgyzstan Askar Akayev, President of Mongolia Natsagiin Bagabandi, President
of Pakistan Pervez Musharraf, President of Russia Vladimir Putin, President of
Turkey Ahmet Necdet Sezer, and President of Tajikistan Emomali Rahmon.
Signatories from other CICA members included the prime ministers of Azerbaijan
and Uzbekistan, a deputy prime minister of Israel, as well as special high-
level envoys from Egypt, Iran, and Palestine.

Ten more nations, including the United States, were accorded observer status
in the new forum, as also a number of international organizations, such as the
UN, the OSCE and the Arab League.

In the final Almaty Act, the 16 leaders said that the CICA process presents
"new opportunities for cooperation, peace and security in Asia" and "will
guide us towards a better future, which our peoples deserve". They declared
their "determination to form in Asia a common and indivisible area of
security, where all states peacefully coexist, and their peoples live in
conditions of peace, freedom and prosperity, and confident that peace,
security and development complement, sustain and reinforce each other."

The leaders agreed to hold summits every four years, while the foreign
ministers are to meet every two years. There are also provisions allowing for
special meetings and summits to be convened at the consensus at other times.
The committee of senior officials will keep up the organizational work and
will meet annually.

In another major development, the leaders adopted the CICA Declaration on
Eliminating Terrorism and Promoting Dialogue among Civilizations, condemning
"all forms and manifestations of terrorism, committed no matter when, where or
by whom," and declaring their commitment to cooperation with each other and
other nations in combating terrorism.

### 2006 Summit

The second CICA summit was held in Almaty on June 17, 2006 with participation
of the Heads of State/Government of Afghanistan, Azerbaijan, China,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Pakistan, Russia, Tajikistan, Thailand and Uzbekistan
and Special Envoys of the Heads of State/Government of Egypt, India, Iran,
Israel, Mongolia, Palestine, Turkey and Republic of Korea which was admitted
as the eighteenth member of CICA.

The Second Summit adopted the Statute of CICA Secretariat and Declaration of
the Second CICA Summit. The Declaration of the Second CICA Summit reflected
the general view of the member states on key problems of security and
cooperation in Asia and in other parts of the world. The Declaration also
reiterated the desire of the member states to continue the efforts to move
forward CICA process to achieve its shared objectives; and noted with
satisfaction that the establishment of CICA Secretariat in the territory of
the Republic of Kazakhstan was an important milestone in the evolution of CICA
process. It was also decided to mark October 5 as CICA Day to commemorate the
initiation of the proposal for convening the Conference on Interaction and
Confidence-Building Measures in Asia by H.E. Mr. Nursultan Nazarbayev,
President of the Republic of Kazakhstan at the 47th Session of the United
Nations General Assembly in 1992.

### 2010 Summit

The third CICA Summit was held in Istanbul, Turkey on 8 June 2010 with
participation of the Heads of State/Government of Afghanistan, Azerbaijan,
Iran, Kazakhstan, Mongolia, Russia and Turkey; Deputy Heads of
State/Government of Iraq and Vietnam; and Special Envoys of China, Egypt,
India, Israel, Jordan, Kyrgyzstan, Republic of Korea, Pakistan, Palestine,
Tajikistan, Thailand and United Arab Emirates. Uzbekistan was the only member
state that was not represented at the Summit. For the first time in the short
history of CICA, Chairmanship passed from Kazakhstan to Turkey. Iraq and
Vietnam were admitted as new members of CICA taking the membership to twenty
two. Bangladesh was accorded the status of observer.

Summit adopted the declaration: "_Constructing Cooperative Approach to
Interaction and Security in Asia_ and _Convention on the Privileges and
Immunities of the Secretariat, its Personnel and Representatives of Members of
the Conference on Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia_."

The declaration reflected CICA's stand and views on important issues of
security and cooperation in Asia and other parts of the world including
terrorism, disarmament, illicit drugs, the 2008 financial crisis, environment
as well as situation in Afghanistan and Middle East. The declaration also
reiterated commitment of the member states to carry forward the CICA process
and reaffirmed the importance of initiating deliberations on security issues
in accordance with the provisions of the CICA Catalogue of CBMs.

Turkish President Abdullah Gul mentioned in his concluding statement that
during the summit, Israel was condemned by all members save itself for its
Gaza flotilla raid. He also mentioned that Israel was isolated and "[would]
suffer the consequences of its mistake."

### 2014 Summit

The Fourth CICA Summit, presided by H.E. Mr. Xi Jinping, paramount leader of
China, was held in Shanghai on 21 May 2014 with participation of twenty six
member states, eleven observer states and international organizations, two
partner international organizations, and eight guest states and international
organizations. The Republic of Turkey passed on the CICA Chairmanship to the
People's Republic of China for the period 2014-16. The People's Republic of
China became the third Chairman of CICA after the Republic of Kazakhstan and
the Republic of Turkey.

Salient feature of the Fourth Summit was the largest ever participation by the
Heads of State and Government. Thirteen Heads of State and Government and the
Secretary General of the United Nations participated in the Summit besides
other high level dignitaries including Vice Presidents, Deputy Prime Ministers
and Ministers of Foreign Affairs.

The People's Republic of Bangladesh and the State of Qatar were admitted as
new members of CICA.

On the eve of the Summit, Chinese leader Xi Jinping hosted a banquet and gala
evening, with the theme “United and Harmonious Asian Countries move together
towards future”, for the participants.

At the Summit, participating leaders expressed their views on topics such as
security situation in Asia and measures to promote CICA dialogue, trust and
coordination. In his keynote address, Chinese leader Xi Jinping presented a
new regional security cooperation architecture respecting and ensuring the
security of each and every country and jointly building a road for security of
Asia that is shared by all in a win-win situation. Xi announced the New Asian
Security Concept. Implying that Asian countries can handle their security
without the involvement of the United States, the core of the New Asian
Security Concept is that "Asian issues should be taken care of by Asians, and
Asian security should be maintained by Asians."

The Summit adopted a declaration espousing its theme "On Enhancing Dialogue,
Trust and Coordination for a New Asia of Peace, Stability and Cooperation".
The declaration reflected CICA's stand and views on important issues of
security and cooperation in Asia including terrorism, disarmament, illicit
drugs, organized transnational crime, food and energy security, human rights,
information and communication technology, environment as well as situation in
Afghanistan and Middle East. The declaration also reiterated commitment of the
member states to carry forward the CICA process and reaffirmed the importance
of implementing agreed confidence building measures in all dimensions. The
Summit also welcomed adoption of the new CICA Rules of Procedure.

A memorandum of understanding between the CICA Secretariat and the SCO
Secretariat was signed on the sidelines of the CICA Shanghai Summit.

Summit also adopted revised CICA Rules of Procedure.

### 2019 Summit

The Fifth CICA Summit, presided by Emomali Rahmon, President of the Republic
of Tajikistan, was held in Dushanbe on 15 June 2019. The Fifth Summit gathered
the largest ever participation by the Heads of State and Government. Fifteen
Heads of State and Government participated in the Summit besides other high
level dignitaries including Vice-President, Ministers of Foreign Affairs and
Ambassadors.

### 2022 Summit

The Sixth CICA Summit, presided by Kassym-Jomart Tokayev, President of
Kazakhstan, was held in Astana on 12–13 October 2022.

## Ministerial meetings

### 1999 Ministerial meeting

The first meeting of CICA Ministers of Foreign Affairs was held in Almaty on
September 14, 1999 with participation of fifteen member states: Afghanistan,
Azerbaijan, China, Egypt, India, Iran, Israel, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Pakistan, Palestine, Russia, Tajikistan, Turkey and Uzbekistan.
Representatives of the then Observer States: USA, Japan, Indonesia, Republic
of Korea, Malaysia, Mongolia, Ukraine, and International Organizations like UN
and Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) also
participated in the meeting.

The First Ministerial Meeting laid the foundation of CICA with the signing of
the Declaration on Principles Guiding Relations between CICA Member States by
the Ministers. The Ministers, while reaffirming commitment to the United
Nations Charter, agreed that the Member states will respect each other's
sovereign equality; refrain from the threat or use of force; respect the
territorial integrity of each other; settle disputes in accordance with the
Declaration, UN Charter and international law; refrain from any intervention
in the internal affairs of each other; reaffirm their commitment to the goal
of achieving general and complete disarmament under effective control; enhance
the process of economic, social and cultural cooperation; and respect human
rights and fundamental freedoms of all individuals.

### 2004 Ministerial meeting

The second meeting of CICA Ministers of Foreign Affairs was held in Almaty on
October 22, 2004. At this meeting, CICA Catalogue of Confidence-Building
Measures (CBMs), CICA Rules of Procedure and Declaration of CICA Ministerial
Meeting were adopted. Thailand was admitted as the seventeenth member of CICA.

CICA Rules of Procedure laid down ground rules for decision making, member
ship, observer status, chairmanship, types of meetings and procedure for
conducting meetings. One of the most important aspects of the Rules of
Procedure is that decisions and recommendations at all levels are taken by
consensus. Rules of Procedure were amended by a decision adopted on September
1, 2009. With this amendment, period of Chairmanship was reduced from four
years to two years. It was also decided that the member state hosting regular
Summit would be Chairman till the next regular meeting of Ministers of Foreign
Affairs. The member state hosting the regular meeting of Ministers of Foreign
Affairs would be Chairman till the next regular Summit. Declaration of the
Second Ministerial Meeting included assessment of the situation at that time
at the regional and global levels including Afghanistan, Iraq, Middle East,
South Caucasus, and Korean peninsula. Member states once again condemned
terrorism in all forms and manifestations and reiterated their commitment to
fight this menace.

### 2008 Ministerial meeting

The third meeting of CICA Ministers of Foreign Affairs was held in Almaty on
August 25, 2008. Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan and United Arab Emirates were
admitted to CICA on this occasion taking the member ship to twenty. State of
Qatar was conferred the status of observer. The Declaration of the Ministerial
Meeting, titled CICA Progress in Implementation of CBMs, reaffirmed the
importance of promoting CICA as a multilateral forum for close cooperation;
continuous dialogue and interaction; comprehensive exchange of views;
addressing new challenges and threats; facilitating prevention of conflicts;
peaceful settlement of disputes; as well as for developing and implementing
agreed Confidence-Building Measures (CBMs) in the Asian continent. The
Ministers welcomed commencement of implementation of CBMs and appreciated the
efforts of coordinating and co-coordinating countries in the process.

The Ministers also reviewed the tasks given by the Heads of State and
Government at the Second CICA Summit of 2006 and adopted Conclusions of the
Third Meeting of CICA Ministers of Foreign Affairs reflecting the results of
the work done by the Member states in order to accomplish the tasks given at
the Second Summit and to continue the work towards preparations for the Third
CICA Summit in 2010. The Ministers adopted the Protocol Amending the Statute
of the Secretariat of the Conference on Interaction and Confidence-Building
Measures in Asia which provides for shifting of CICA Secretariat from Almaty
to Astana as and when need arises. The Ministers also adopted, in principle,
Convention on the Legal Capacity of CICA Secretariat, its Personnel and their
Privileges and Immunities and urged the Member states to finalize their
respective internal procedures with a view to sign it at the earliest
possible.

### 2012 Ministerial Meeting

The Fourth Meeting of CICA Ministers of Foreign Affairs was held in Astana,
Republic of Kazakhstan on 12 September 2012 with participation of ministers
and their special envoys. The meeting was jointly presided by Ministers of
Foreign Affairs of Turkey and Kazakhstan, representing CICA Chairmanship and
the host country. Ministerial Meeting was preceded by a commemorative session
celebrating twentieth anniversary of CICA, which was addressed by President
Nursultan Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan. A comprehensive declaration adopted by the
ministers reaffirmed CICA's stand and views on important issues of security
and cooperation in Asia and other parts of the world including terrorism,
disarmament, illicit drugs, energy security, environment as well as situation
in Afghanistan and Middle East. The declaration also encouraged Member States
to initiate implementation of confidence-building measures in military-
political dimension. Ministers agreed to initiate steps to develop CICA Action
Plan for implementation of the UN Global Counter-terrorism Strategy;
constitute a CICA Business Council; explore opportunities of developing road
and railway links in the CICA region; and finalise the revised rules of
procedure.

### Ministerial 2017 Marking 25th Anniversary

The informal ministerial marking the 25th anniversary of the CICA was held on
September 20, 2017 on the sidelines of the 72nd UN General Assembly.
Kazakshtan's Foreign Minister Kairat Abdrakhmanov recognized Ambassador Gong
Jianwei, Executive Director of CICA Secretariat, with a medal honoring the
25th anniversary of Kazakhstan's diplomatic service corps.