International lending institution

The **Council of Europe Development Bank** (**CEB** , French: _Banque de
Développement du Conseil de l'Europe_) is a multilateral development bank,
granting loans to member states to help disaster victims, help with job
creation, and improve social infrastructure. As of 2020[update], its assets
stood at 28 billion euros, which it uses to co-finance projects by means of
loans of up to 40% of the project cost.

Its origins go back to 1956 when the Council of Europe created its
Resettlement Fund for National Refugees and Over-Population in Europe (French:
_**Fonds de rétablissement du Conseil de l'Europe pour les réfugiés**_), which
was renamed as the Council of Europe Social Development Fund (French: _**Fonds
de développement social du Conseil de l'Europe**_) in 1994 and eventually as
the CEB in 1999. Since 1956, the bank has been headquartered at 55, avenue
Kléber in Paris. It is a separate legal entity from the Council of Europe and
is autonomous in its decision-making. It has a high credit rating from
Moody's, Standard and Poor's and Fitch Ratings.

CEB formally uses both the French and English languages. English largely
replaced French as internal working language in the 2010s.[_citation needed_]

## History

The CEB dates from 1956, when the Council of Europe established the
Resettlement Fund for National Refugees and Over-Population in Europe as a
Partial Agreement. In 1994, it changed its name to the Council of Europe
Social Development Fund, before becoming the Council of Europe Development
Bank in 1999.

The original aim was to help refugees and other displaced persons after the
Second World War. It later expanded its scope of activities to include
assistance to disaster victims, help with job creation, and improve social
infrastructure. Its aim today is to promote social cohesion in its member
states.

## Membership

CEB member states:

Founder members

Members

Members who are not part of the Council of Europe

There are currently 43 member states, as follows:

  * Albania
  * Andorra
  * Belgium
  * Bosnia and Herzegovina
  * Bulgaria
  * Croatia
  * Cyprus
  * Czech Republic
  * Denmark
  * Estonia
  * Finland
  * France
  * Georgia
  * Germany
  * Greece
  * Holy See
  * Hungary
  * Iceland
  * Ireland
  * Italy
  * Kosovo
  * Latvia
  * Liechtenstein
  * Lithuania
  * Luxembourg
  * North Macedonia
  * Malta
  * Moldova
  * Montenegro
  * Netherlands
  * Norway
  * Poland
  * Portugal
  * Romania
  * San Marino
  * Serbia
  * Slovakia
  * Slovenia
  * Spain
  * Sweden
  * Switzerland
  * Turkey
  * Ukraine

Except for the Holy See and Kosovo, all member states are also members of the
Council of Europe.

## Governors

  * Raphael Alomar (1999-2011), previously head of the Council of Europe Resettlement Fund (1993-1994) and Social Development Fund (1994-1999)
  * Rolf Wenzel (2011-2021)
  * Carlo Monticelli (from 2021)