EU project with Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Moldova and Ukraine

The **Eastern Partnership** (**EaP**) is a joint initiative of the European
Union, together with its member states, and six Eastern European countries.
The EaP framework governs the EU's relationship with the post-Soviet states of
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Moldova, and Ukraine. The EaP is
intended to provide a forum for discussions regarding trade, economic
strategy, travel agreements, and other issues between the EU and its Eastern
European neighbours. It also aims at building a common area of shared values
of democracy, prosperity, stability, and increased cooperation. The project
was initiated by Poland and a subsequent proposal was prepared in co-operation
with Sweden. It was presented by the foreign ministers of Poland and Sweden at
the EU's General Affairs and External Relations Council in Brussels on 26 May
2008. The Eastern Partnership was inaugurated by the EU in Prague, Czech
Republic on 7 May 2009.

The first meeting of foreign ministers in the framework of the Eastern
Partnership was held on 8 December 2009 in Brussels.

## History

The Eastern Partnership (EaP) was established as a specific Eastern dimension
of the European Neighbourhood Policy, which contains both a bilateral and
multilateral track. The Eastern Partnership complements the Northern Dimension
and the Union for the Mediterranean by providing an institutionalised forum
for discussing visa agreements, free trade deals, and strategic partnership
agreements with the EU's eastern neighbours, while avoiding the controversial
topic of accession to the European Union. Its geographical scope consists of
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Moldova, and Ukraine. Unlike the Union
for the Mediterranean, the Eastern Partnership does not have its own
secretariat, but is controlled directly by the European Commission.

4th Eastern Partnership Summit,  
Riga, May 2015

In May 2008, Poland and Sweden put forward a joint proposal for an Eastern
Partnership with Ukraine, Moldova, Armenia, Azerbaijan, and Georgia, with
Russia and Belarus participating in some aspects. Eventually, Belarus joined
the initiative as a full member, while Russia does not participate at all. The
Polish foreign minister Radosław Sikorski said "_We all know the EU has
enlargement fatigue. We have to use this time to prepare as much as possible
so that when the fatigue passes, membership becomes something natural_ " It
was discussed at the European Council on 19 and 20 June 2008, along with the
Union for the Mediterranean. The Czech Republic endorsed the proposal
completely, while Bulgaria and Romania were cautious, fearing that the Black
Sea Forum for Partnership and Dialogue and the Organization of the Black Sea
Economic Cooperation could be undermined. Meanwhile, Germany, France, and
others were not happy with the possibility that the Eastern Partnership could
be seen as a stepping stone to membership (especially for Ukraine), while
Poland and other Eastern states have explicitly welcomed this effect.

The Eastern Partnership was officially launched in May 2009 when the Czech
Republic invited the leaders of the six members of the initiative. Meanwhile,
Germany attended the summit to signal their alarm at the economic situation in
the East. Russia accused the EU of trying to carve out a new sphere of
influence, which the EU denied, stating that they were "responding to the
demands of these countries...and the economic reality is that most of their
trade is done with the EU".

## Member states

The Eastern Partnership consists of the following 27 EU member states and six
Eastern European post-Soviet states:

EU member states

  * Austria
  * Belgium
  * Bulgaria
  * Croatia
  * Cyprus
  * Czech Republic
  * Denmark
  * Estonia
  * Finland
  * France
  * Germany
  * Greece
  * Hungary
  * Ireland
  * Italy
  * Latvia
  * Lithuania
  * Luxembourg
  * Malta
  * Netherlands
  * Poland
  * Portugal
  * Romania
  * Slovakia
  * Slovenia
  * Spain
  * Sweden

Non-EU members

  * Armenia
  * Azerbaijan
  * Belarus (suspended)
  * Georgia
  * Moldova
  * Ukraine

In addition, the above members, except Belarus, further participate in the
Council of Europe and the Euronest Parliamentary Assembly in which these
states forge closer political and economic ties with the European Union.

The participation of Belarus in the Eastern Partnership and their President
Lukashenko, who has been described as authoritarian, at a summit in 2009 was
the subject of debate. On 30 September 2011 Belarus seemingly withdrew from
the initiative because of: "unprecedented discrimination" and a "substitution"
of the principles on which it was built two years ago. However three days
later Foreign Minister of Belarus Sergei Martynov refuted this.

On 28 June 2021, the Belarusian Ministry of Foreign Affairs confirmed that
Belarus would suspend its membership in the Eastern Partnership.

## Institutions and aims

Warsaw Summit 2011

The Eastern Partnership is a forum aiming to improve the political and
economic trade-relations of the six Post-Soviet states of "strategic
importance" – Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Moldova, Ukraine with the
European Union. Promotion of human rights and rule of law in former Soviet
states has been reported to form the "core" of the policy of the Eastern
Partnership. The EU draft of the EaP states that: "Shared values including
democracy, the rule of law, and respect for human rights will be at its core,
as well as the principles of market economy, sustainable development and good
governance." The Partnership is to provide the foundation for new Association
Agreements between the EU and those partners who have made sufficient progress
towards the principles and values mentioned. Apart from values, the
declaration says the region is of "strategic importance" and the EU has an
"interest in developing an increasingly close relationship with its Eastern
partners..."

The inclusion of Belarus prompts the question whether values or geopolitics
are paramount in the initiative. EU diplomats agree that the country's
authoritarian president, Alexander Lukashenko, has done little to merit
involvement in the policy at this stage. But the EU fears Russia will
strengthen its grip on Minsk if it is left out. There are plans to model the
concept on the Stabilisation and Association Process used by the EU in the
Balkans, including a possible free trade area encompassing the countries in
the region, similar to BAFTA or CEFTA. A future membership perspective is not
ruled out, either.

## Priority areas of cooperation

The key focus of the EU engagement within the Eastern Partnership includes the
achievement of tangible results for the citizens in the partner countries. The
pursuit of tangible outcomes has resulted in 20 deliverables of Eastern
Partnership cooperation for 2020. They were developed in close consultation
with the stakeholders, and include the following:

  * Modernised transport connections through the Trans-European Transport Network (TEN-T);
  * Increased political ownership of energy efficiency;
  * Easier access to finance for SMEs, including to lending in local currency;
  * Establishing ways of reducing mobile telephony roaming tariffs between partners by conducting a study;
  * Increased trade opportunities;
  * Greater outreach to grassroots Civil Society Organizations; and,
  * More support for youth.

A joint working document "Eastern Partnership – focusing on key priorities and
deliverables" drafted by the Commission and EEAS details the objectives across
the five priority areas of cooperation agreed at the Eastern Partnership
Summit in Riga in 2015:

  1. Stronger governance: Strengthening institutions and good governance
  2. Stronger economy: Economic development and market opportunities
  3. Better connectivity: Connectivity, energy efficiency, environment and climate change
  4. Stronger society: Mobility and people-to-people contacts
  5. Involvement of broader society, gender and communication

## Financing

The EC earmarked €600 million for the six partner countries for the period
2010–13 as part of the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument,
constituting about a quarter of the total funding available to the Eastern
Partnership countries in that period. The programme had three main purposes:
Comprehensive Institution Building programmes, aimed at supporting reforms
(approximately €175 million); Pilot regional development programmes, aimed at
addressing regional economic and social disparities (approximately €75
million); and Implementation of the Eastern Partnership, focusing on
democracy, governance and stability, economic integration and convergence with
EU policies, energy security, and contacts between people with the aim of
bringing the partners closer to the EU (approximately €350 million).

In December 2010, the European Investment Bank established the ″Eastern
Partnership Technical Assistance Trust Fund″ (EPTATF). It includes the
″Eastern Partnership Internship Programme″ which is open to students who are
nationals of Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Moldova, or Ukraine.

In 2021, a new aid package was given to the EU's six Eastern Partnership
countries, where Ukraine received €1.9 billion, Azerbaijan €140 million, and
Armenia €2.6 billion. In particular, the aid package to Armenia was 62 percent
more than previously promised.

## Euronest Parliamentary Assembly

Established in 2011 as a component of the Eastern Partnership, the Euronest
Parliamentary Assembly is the inter-parliamentary forum in which members of
the European Parliament and the Eastern Partnership participate and forge
closer political and economic ties with the EU. The Assembly gathers once a
year, meeting locations alternate between an Eastern Partnership country and
one of the European Parliament places of work (Brussels, Luxembourg or
Strasbourg).

Countries that could join the European Union

Current members

Candidate countries

Applicant / potential candidate countries

Membership possible

Membership not possible

### Prospect of EU membership

In December 2019, following the eighth Euronest Parliamentary Assembly, a
resolution was passed by all members outlining various EU integration goals to
be achieved by 2030. The resolution affirms that the process of EU enlargement
is open to Eastern Partnership member states and that future enlargement of
the EU will be mutually beneficial for both the EU and Eastern Partnership
members.

In June 2020, European lawmakers called for the creation of a common economic
space between the EU and the six members of the Eastern Partnership, as part
of a process of gradual integration into the EU. The European Parliament
passed the motion which was supported by 507 MEPs, with 119 voting against and
37 abstaining. The motion also confirmed that the Eastern Partnership policy
can facilitate a process of gradual integration into the EU.

## EU-Ukraine bilateral relations

Pro-EU demonstration on 27 November 2013 in Kyiv

Ukraine is one of six post-Soviet nations to be invited to co-operate with the
EU within the new multilateral framework that the Eastern partnership is
expected to establish. However, Kyiv pointed out that it remains pessimistic
about the "added value" of this initiative. Indeed, Ukraine and the EU have
already started the negotiations on new, enhanced political and free-trade
agreements (Association and Free-Trade Agreements). Also, there has been some
progress in liberalising the visa regime despite persistent problems in the EU
Member States' visa approach towards Ukrainians.[_citation needed_]

That is why Ukraine has a specific view of the Eastern Partnership Project.
According to the Ukrainian presidency, it should correspond, in case of his
country, to the strategic foreign policy objective, i.e. the integration with
the EU. Yet, the Eastern Partnership documents (the European Council
Declaration of May 2009) do not confirm such priorities as political and
economic integration or lifting visas.

Ukraine has expressed enthusiasm about the project. Ukraine deputy premier
Hryhoriy Nemyria said that the project is the way to modernise the country and
that they welcome the Eastern Partnership policy, because it uses 'de facto'
the same instruments as for EU candidates.

Under the Eastern Partnership, Poland and Ukraine have reached a new agreement
replacing visas with simplified permits for Ukrainians residing within 30 km
of the border. Up to 1.5 million people may benefit from this agreement which
took effect on 1 July 2009.

## Relationship with Russia

Russia has expressed strong concerns over the Eastern Partnership, seeing it
as an attempt to expand the European Union's "sphere of influence". Russia has
also expressed concerns that the EU is putting undue pressure on Belarus by
suggesting it might be marginalised if it follows Russia in recognising the
independence of the Georgian breakaway regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia.
"Is this promoting democracy or is it blackmail? It's about pulling countries
from the positions they want to take as sovereign states", Russian foreign
minister Sergei Lavrov has stated.

Sweden, the co-author of the Eastern Partnership project together with Poland,
rejected Mr Lavrov's position as "completely unacceptable". "The Eastern
Partnership is not about spheres of influence. The difference is that these
countries themselves opted to join", Swedish foreign minister Carl Bildt said
at the Brussels Forum. The EU's position on Georgia is not 'blackmail' but "is
about upholding the principles of the EU and international law, which Russia
should also be respecting", he added.

In November 2009, Russian President Dmitry Medvedev dismissed the Eastern
Partnership as useless: "Frankly speaking, I don't see any special use (in the
program) and all the participants of this partnership are confirming this to
me". However a few days later Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said that
Russia does not rule out joining the EU's Eastern Partnership programme.
Russia maintained its opposition towards the EPP. For instance, after the
Warsaw Summit 2011 of the EPP, Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin stated
that due to the economic crisis in the EU, Ukraine would probably not join the
EU. Instead of joining the EU, Putin offered a Russia – Ukraine relationship
which he said would provide a more competitive and productive economic
process.

In May 2015, President of the European Council Donald Tusk stated that Russia
was "[compensating for] its shortcomings by destructive, aggressive and
bullying tactics against its neighbours" while German Chancellor Angela Merkel
said that "the EU makes a crystal clear difference with Russia. We accept that
the different Eastern Partnership nations can go their own way and we accept
these different ways." Finnish Prime Minister Alexander Stubb stated that "It
is the prerogative and right of every independent and sovereign state to
choose which club it wants to belong to."

## Eastern Partnership Civil Society Forum

Founded during the Prague Eastern Partnership Summit in 2009, the Eastern
Partnership Civil Society Forum (EaP CSF) is an integral part of the Eastern
Partnership program and creates a significant and institutional platform for
civil society organisations to monitor and discuss the developments regarding
democracy building and human rights development in the six partnership
countries. The EaP CSF consists of six national platforms and five thematic
working groups, which are represented by an annually elected Steering
Committee composed of 13 members. The Secretariat of the EaP CSF is based in
Brussels. The EaP CSF meets annually to discuss the latest developments and to
set their working programme. The first meeting took place in Brussels in 2009.
The last EaP CSF Civil Society Summit meeting – which continued the tradition
of its preceding 16 Annual Assemblies - took place in Vienna in November 2024.
During the meeting, 90 civil society organizations from the EaP countries and
the EU adopted a resolution detailing key recommendations on the future of the
EaP region and policy.

The EaP CSF aims to support the effective participation of civil society from
EaP and EU countries in the process of planning, monitoring and implementing
the Eastern Partnership policy. It maintains a dialogue with EU and EaP
decision makers to democratically transform the EaP countries and guarantee
their integration into the EU.

In 2011, the EaP CSF launched the Eastern Partnership Index, a data-driven
monitoring tool used to inform policy-making. It tracks, on a biennial scale,
the reform journey of the six Eastern Partnership countries towards
sustainable democratic development and European integration.

The EaP CSF has actively advocated for greater political and financial support
to civil society in the Eastern partnership, in light of their role in
supporting democratization and rule of law reforms. It has also actively
campaigned for an EU response to the human rights situation in Azerbaijan and
Belarus. It also monitors the progress on the Moldovan, Ukrainian and Georgian
candidacies to the EU.

As of January 2025, the EaP CSF counts over 1,200 member organizations and
remains an official interlocutor of EU institutions and EaP partner countries
in the EaP architecture. A similar set up is unique for the EaP region, given
that no similar platform exists for the Western Balkans or the Southern
Neighbourhood. The EaP CSF provides a framework for transmitting European
values and norms. As a result, some scholars have attributed a socialization
function to the Forum, whereby norms sponsored by the European Union are
internalized by participating civil society organizations.

## Summits

  * 1st Eastern Partnership Summit in Prague in May 2009
  * 2nd Eastern Partnership Summit in Warsaw in September 2011
  * 3rd Eastern Partnership Summit in Vilnius in November 2013
  * 4th Eastern Partnership Summit in Riga in May 2015
  * 5th Eastern Partnership Summit in Brussels in November 2017
  * 6th Eastern Partnership Summit in Brussels in December 2021

## Criticism

Although the Eastern Partnership was inaugurated on 7 May 2009, academic
research critically analysing the policy became available by early 2010 with
the findings from a UK research project, funded by the Economic and Social
Research Council, examining the EU's relations with three Eastern Partnership
member states, Belarus, Ukraine, and Moldova notes both conceptual and
empirical dilemmas. First, conceptually the EU has limited uniform awareness
of what it is trying to promote in its eastern neighbourhood under the aegis
of 'shared values', 'collective norms' and 'joint ownership'. Secondly,
empirically, the EU seems to favour a 'top-down' governance approach (based on
rule/norm transfer and conditionality) in its relations with outsiders, which
is clearly at odds with a voluntary idea of 'partnership', and explicitly
limits the input of 'the other' in the process of reform.