Body of the League of Nations

The **Economic and Financial Organization** (EFO, French: _Organisation
économique et financière_) was the largest of the technical arms of the League
of Nations, and the world's first international organization dedicated to
promoting economic and monetary co-operation. It took shape in the early 1920s
and was in activity until the creation of the United Nations in 1945. It has
been described as having had seminal influence on postwar economic
institutions, notably the International Monetary Fund (IMF).

## Background

The establishment of the EFO took place in the aftermath of unprecedented
transnational cooperation initiatives among allied powers during World War I,
which were also pioneering experiments in planned economy imposed by the
circumstances. These included the Wheat Executive established in late 1916,
and the Allied Maritime Transport Council established in late 1917. They had
brought together enterprising civil servants such as Italy's Bernardo
Attolico, France's Jean Monnet, and Britain's Arthur Salter, who would play
key roles in the war's aftermath. In February 1919, the Paris Peace Conference
established a Supreme Economic Council to manage the postwar economic
emergencies, but that was soon undermined by a growing division of views
between France and Italy on one side, advocating a continuation of the wartime
joint action, and the UK and U.S. on the other side, preferring a rapid return
to market-oriented business as usual.

In late 1919, Dutch financial community leaders Gerard Vissering and Carel E.
ter Meulen organized two conferences in Amsterdam whose participants included
economists Gustav Cassel and John Maynard Keynes. On the basis of their
conclusions that a collective intergovernmental effort was needed to remedy
the postwar disruptions, a petition circulated in January 1920 by _the Times_
in the UK and _the New York Times_ in the U.S. collected 150 signatures of
luminaries such as Gustave Ador, Robert Cecil, Arthur Twining Hadley, Herbert
Hoover, J. P. Morgan Jr., Fridtjof Nansen, Richard Vassar Vassar-Smith, Paul
Warburg, and others including from Denmark and France, an early example of
cross-national advocacy. In early February, the British government made it
known that it would favor the convening of an international conference by the
League of Nations, which had just been formally established in January 1920.
The League Council endorsed that proposal during a meeting in London on 13
February 1920, setting the scene for the Brussels Conference that would be
held in September–October 1920.

## Establishment and setup

Arthur Salter was the head of the EFO during its heyday from 1922 to 1931

In 1919, a prefiguration team of the League, located at 117 Piccadilly in
London, had started to collect and publish economic statistics, which remained
the initial focus of the Economic and Financial Section that was soon
established within the League Secretariat, and spent much of 1920 preparing
the conference. Walter Layton led that fledgling team and moved with it to
Geneva in the course of 1920. Per Jacobsson joined the staff in April 1920. In
1922, Salter took over from Layton's acting successor Frank H. Nixon, and led
the EFO until 1931, expanding its staff from seventeen to sixty during that
period. By then, it was significantly larger than any other section of the
League Secretariat.

Following a recommendation of the Brussels Conference, the League's inaugural
Assembly meeting in November 1920 endorsed the expansion of the scope into an
organization that would be able to formulate policy recommendations to member
(and non-member) states, despite initial misgivings from the United Kingdom.
On that basis, the League established a Joint Provisional Economic and
Financial Committee (French: _Commission économique et financière provisoire_)
composed of experts nominated by the League's Council, and thus not officially
representing their respective governments. After that, the EFO's work agenda
was determined by the Second Committee of the League's Assembly, which dealt
with all so-called technical issues (under the formal authority of the
League's Council) and met once every year in September.

In 1923, the Provisional Committee was made permanent and divided into an
Economic Committee, dealing primarily with matters of trade and industry
organization and composed mostly of government officials, and a Financial
Committee focused on monetary and fiscal issues with a greater participation
of central and private bankers. The two committees' setup was flexible and
inclusive enough that American delegates participated in them from 1927
despite the fact that the U.S. was not a member of the League. Similarly,
Japanese delegate remained on the two Committees for some time after Japan
withdrew from the League in 1933. The Economic Committee was granted permanent
formal status within the League in 1927, initially with a membership of 15
that grew over subsequent years, and the Financial Committee in 1937. In the
meantime the Financial Committee kept a smaller size of 10 members, who
typically came from central banks and finance ministries of member states and
the U.S.; Belgium, France and the UK were represented in it by finance
ministry officials, while Switzerland and the Netherlands delegated private-
sector and central bankers.

There were also a number of sub-committees of fixed duration, frequently
including leading economists of the time, and standing committees on fiscal
and statistical matters. The organisational setup of the EFO, like that of the
League of Nations in general, was deliberately obscure as the related opacity
of decision-forming was viewed as helpful to manage the sensitive matters of
economic and financial diplomacy.

### Financial Committee membership

As of late 1923, the Financial Committee's members included

  * Albert-Édouard Janssen (National Bank of Belgium)
  * Otto Niemeyer (Bank of England)
  * South African financier Henry Strakosch
  * Dutch financier Carel ter Meulen
  * Italian banker Giuseppe Bianchini
  * Jean Parmentier (French Finance Ministry)
  * Vilém Pospíšil [cs] (Czechoslovak Finance Ministry)
  * Sekiba Teiji (Japanese delegate at the Reparation Commission).

A decade later, the Committee still included Janssen (as Chair), Niemeyer,
Strakosch, and ter Meulen, as well as

  * French finance ministry official Gabriel Dayras
  * German banker Paul Kempner [de]
  * Polish economist Feliks Młynarski
  * Norges Bank governor Nicolai Rygg
  * the Bank of Japan's Shimasuye Shozo
  * Argentine banker Carlos Tornquist
  * Italian lawmaker Cesare Tumedei [it].

Niemeyer, Strakosh and ter Meulen, who had been core committee members from
the outset, all resigned in 1937, together with Młynarski.

The other individuals who sat on the Provisional Economic and Financial
Committee between 1920 and 1923 and/or on the Financial Committee between 1923
and 1931 were

  * Aoki Takeshi (Bank of Japan)
  * Arai Kentarō (Japanese Finance Ministry)
  * Joseph Avenol (French Finance Ministry)
  * Federico Ettore Balzarotti (Credito Italiano)
  * Basil Blackett (British Treasury)
  * Louis de Chalendar (French Finance Ministry)
  * Léopold Dubois (Swiss Bank Corporation)
  * José Manuel Figueras Arizcun [es] (Banco de Bilbao)
  * Emil Glückstadt [da] (Danske Landmandsbank)
  * Omer Lepreux [nl] (National Bank of Belgium)
  * Carl Melchior (M. M. Warburg & Co.)
  * Mori Kengo [ja] (Japanese Finance Ministry)
  * American lawyer Jeremiah Smith Jr
  * Fulvio Suvich [it] (Italian Finance Ministry)
  * Tsushima Juichi (Japanese financial attaché in London)
  * Marcus Wallenberg Sr (Stockholms Enskilda Bank).

## International financial and economic conferences

The EFO was the linchpin of the four interwar international financial and
economic conferences, namely the Brussels Conference of 1920, the Genoa
Conference of 1922, the Geneva Conference of 1927, and the London Conference
of 1933, even though only the latter two were formally organized under the
League's aegis. In the first three, the EFO was broadly successful at
cementing an international policy consensus on the underpinnings of financial
stability, including sound fiscal management and independent central banks,
even though it made less headway towards restrictions on cartels and trade
protection. One flaw of the EFO doctrine, however, was insufficient insistence
on banking supervision, in part a reflection of the fact that the United
States, which had the most advanced supervisory practices of the time, was not
a member of the League. Partly for that reason, the European banking crisis of
1931 shattered the 1920s orthodoxy, leading to the complete failure of the
London Conference in June 1933 after which the League made no further similar
attempts.

The League also sponsored a less ambitious International Conference for the
Simplification of Customs Formalities, which was held in Geneva from October
15 to November 3, 1923.

## Stabilization loans in the 1920s

Jean Monnet was the main architect of the League's loan framework pioneered
with Austria in 1922–1923

Unlike the postwar IMF, which has significant resources of its own, the EFO
itself had no financial firepower but could resolve collective action problems
among private investors and governments that desired to foster financial
stability but were unable or unwilling to do so on a purely bilateral basis.
Its first endeavor, albeit of limited impact, came in early 1922 with support
to a loan to Czechoslovakia led by Baring Brothers.

### Austria

A.R. Zimmerman, previously mayor of Rotterdam, was the League's Commissioner-
General in Austria

The EFO's first real action came later in 1922 with the financial distress of
Austria, which was considered desperate enough that the allied powers did not
want to take responsibility for it themselves. Austria was buffeted between
the competing interests of Britain (which had high credit exposure to it),
France (which was obsessed with the prospect of German-Austrian unification),
Czechoslovakia and Italy (which had competing designs on Austria as its
respective neighbours on the north and south). Jean Monnet, by then the
League's deputy secretary-general, convinced the Council to take on the
challenge, in conjunction with eloquent pleas by Austrian Chancellor Ignaz
Seipel. Monnet had the intuition that the respective British, French,
Czechoslovak and Italian interests could be leveraged into a cooperative plan,
and had it conceived during a lakeside gathering with Salter and Basil
Blackett. As he put it, "that real danger of foreign intervention could be
literally flipped and transformed into a positive endeavor of joint action. It
was about channelling the very forces that could have been tempted to take
advantage of the crisis into contributing to the preservation of Austrian
independence." A special committee on Austria, formed to prepare the
assistance program jointly with the Financial Committee of the League, brought
together Seipel with Britain's Arthur Balfour, Czechoslovakia's Edvard Beneš,
France's Gabriel Hanotaux, and Italy's Guglielmo Imperiali.

The plan, finalized in three protocols signed in Geneva on 4 October 1922,
entailed a fiscal and structural adjustment program in line with the
principles which League staff had fostered at the Brussels and Genoa
Conferences, It foresaw the appointment of a powerful Commissioner-General who
would be resident in Austria at the program's inception and control the
disbursement of the funds, subject to the execution of the reform commitments.
The appointment of the Commissioner-General by the League itself, as opposed
to a business person representing the private creditors, was a major
innovation which Monnet defended as key to ensure political acceptance.
Furthermore and also in line with the Brussels and Genoa consensus, the
program included the creation of an independent national central bank along
the lines advocated by Montagu Norman. During the program's negotiation in
1922, Norman initially fought for the head of that institution to be a
foreigner, but this met considerable political pushback in Vienna. In December
1922, the Austrian government unilaterally decided to appoint local banker
Richard Reisch [de] as governor of the Oesterreichische Nationalbank, which
was promptly established in January 1923. This conflict delayed the loan's
issuance until a compromise was found in the spring of 1923, under which the
League would appoint an "adviser" with extensive oversight powers over the
central bank's decisions. The £2 million loan was guaranteed by European
governments and successfully raised in private markets in May 1923,
underwritten by J.P. Morgan & Co. in New York and the Bank of England in
London.

### Other loans

After Austria in 1922, similar features were applied to the League-coordinated
loans to Hungary (1924), Danzig (1925 and 1927), Bulgaria (1926 and 1928),
Estonia (1927), and Greece (1924 and 1928). There were thus nine "League
loans" in total, in six countries, for an aggregate amount of £81 million. Of
that, nearly half was provided by British investors and nearly one-fifth by
American ones, the rest coming from Continental Europe. The Hungarian loan was
requested in August 1923 after the Reparation Commission had agreed on the
amounts Hungary had to pay. Hungary was perceived to be in a less desperate
position than Austria a year earlier, which allowed for issuance without any
government guarantee. The League's buildup of credibility made it possible to
gradually lower the loans' costs. Portugal explored a similar agreement in
1928 but eventually balked at the onerous conditions, as Albania had done
earlier in the decade. In Hungary, Danzig, and Greece, as in Austria, the
loans entailed the creation of a new independent central bank, respectively
the Hungarian National Bank, Bank of Danzig, and Bank of Greece. In Bulgaria
and Estonia, the existing national bank was restructured and made more
independent.

In all of these loans except Estonia, a foreign official would control two key
accounts on the League's behalf (this was a specifically appointed
Commissioner-General in Austria, Hungary and Bulgaria; the League's High
Commissioner in Danzig; and the pre-existing International Financial
Commission in Greece). First, the external loan account held money provided by
the foreign creditors for use by the borrowing government to cover fiscal
deficits during the initial phase of transition. Second, the security revenues
account held money collected in the borrowing country as so-called security
revenues that served as collateral for the foreign loans, typically from
customs and/or from state monopolies. In addition to controlling both
accounts, the League's Commissioner usually had a veto right over government
decisions deemed adverse to the good execution of the program. Separately and
complementarily, the program entailed the appointment of a League Adviser to
the (generally newly created) national central bank, formally an employee of
the central bank but in effect a representative of the League. The Adviser's
position was defined in the statutes of the central bank, which were typically
drafted directly by the EFO's Financial Committee. It granted him a wide
supervisory role over the management and operations of the central bank,
sometimes including a veto on the bank's Board decisions. Finally, the program
would designate Trustees to administer the security revenues in case of
default, except in Greece where it relied on the International Financial
Commission. Several of these officials became known as so-called money
doctors, an expression that referred more broadly to foreign experts that
helped countries improve their financial and especially monetary policies by
providing expertise and experience from the national systems viewed as most
advanced.

Countries that had recourse to similar borrowing schemes without appealing to
the League's assistance, primarily Poland in 1927 and Romania in 1929,
struggled to secure financing conditions as good as those under the League's
framework, despite the fact that both were advised by Monnet who was by then
in private practice. The governance innovations pioneered by the League
inspired other loan packages, including the 1924 Dawes Plan for Germany and
those of Belgium and Italy in 1926. Overall and from the standpoint of their
aims of financial stabilization and economic recovery by means of fundamental
change in the fiscal and monetary regimes, the loans were impressively
successful.

### Officials appointed by the League

  * Commissioner-General in Austria: Alfred Rudolph Zimmerman [nl] (Dutch, December 1922 – 1926)
  * Adviser at the Austrian National Bank: Charles Schnyder von Wartensee (Swiss, 1923-1924); Anton van Gijn [nl] (Dutch, 1924-1925); Robert Kay (American, 1926-1929)
  * Commissioner-General in Hungary: Jeremiah Smith Jr. (American, May 1924-June 1926)
  * Adviser at the Hungarian National Bank: Harry Arthur Siepmann (British, June 1924 – 1926)
  * Commissioner-General in Bulgaria: René Charron [bg] (French, 1926-1932); Jean Watteau (French, 1932-1934); Pierre Cheysson (French, 1934-1940)
  * Adviser at the Bulgarian National Bank: Jean Watteau (French, 1930-1932); Nikolai Köstner (Estonian, 1932-1940)
  * Adviser at the Bank of Greece: William Horace Finlayson (British, 1928-1937)
  * Adviser at the Bank of Estonia: Walter James Franklin Williamson (British, 1926-1930)

## European integration advocacy

In the late 1920s and early 1930s, partly in response to the surge of U.S.
protectionism followed by tariff escalation between the United Kingdom and its
European neighbors, the EFO developed tentative ideas about European
integration, foreshadowing developments two decades later that would lead to
the establishment of the European Coal and Steel Community. Salter and Italy's
Pietro Stoppani, who had joined the EFO staff in 1923, reflected on the
parallel between Europe and the United States and the case for a large
integrated market delivering beneficial economies of scale; Salter used the
expression "United States of Europe" in his own writing. In their view, the
realistic way to promote that aim was to agree on exceptions to the most
favoured nation principle among some or all European countries, a form of
trade regionalism, also stimulated by the landmark call for a "European Union"
submitted by France's Aristide Briand to 27 European member states of the
League in September 1929, and the responses it elicited. In September 1930,
the League's Assembly decided to set up a Commission of Inquiry for European
Union (French: _Commission d'Études pour l'Union Européenne_) to elaborate on
Briand's proposal, which was chaired by Briand but soon met stalemate in 1931,
contributing to Briand's downfall as French foreign minister in January 1932.
The EFO's legitimation of European regionalism played a role in stimulating
two stillborn projects, the Austro-German Customs Union publicized in March
1931 and the Ouchy Convention of June 1932 between the Belgium–Luxembourg
Economic Union and the Netherlands.

## Policy developments in the 1930s

After Salter left the League Secretariat in 1931, the negotiation on the
appointment of its successor led to the division of the EFO Secretariat into
an Economic Section, headed by Stoppani, and a Financial section headed by
Britain's Alexander Loveday, who had joined the fledgling League staff at
inception in 1919 and had led its statistical endeavors since then. The two
sections were eventually reunited in 1939 together with the secretariat of the
League's Communications and Transit Organization, under Loveday's leadership
as Stoppani retired. Meanwhile, the staff had developed a genuine
supranational ethos, as illustrated by the fact that Stoppani ignored
Mussolini's instructions to resign after Italy withdrew from the League in
1934. Throughout the 1930s, the EFO displayed intellectual honesty and
flexibility by abandoning some of its prior gold standard orthodoxy and
advocating policies directed at full employment, echoing the contemporaneous
theoretical work of John Maynard Keynes and the Stockholm School of Economics.

Following the shock of the banking crisis of 1931, the EFO managed to mitigate
some of the consequences in its program countries of the 1920s, e.g. Austria,
Hungary, and Bulgaria. The EFO persuaded existing lenders to apply forbearance
and enlisting new ones to refinance the loans, while directly supervising some
of the debt-servicing operations.

In general policy matters, as the scope for wide international consensus had
shrunk dramatically, the EFO adapted by experimenting with new forms of policy
influence. For example, in a work stream on double taxation already started in
the late 1920s and sponsored by the Rockefeller Foundation, it prepared model
bilateral conventions and sent them to individual governments, rather than
convening a conference that would have been unlikely to achieve unanimous
agreement; eighty such conventions were subsequently signed between 1929 and
1938. The EFO also had partial success with a number of countries in its
advocacy of dismantling foreign exchange controls and restrictive bilateral
clearing agreements in the mid-1930s. It also worked on securities fraud, the
standardization of loan contracts, and restrictions on the sale of raw
materials.

Stoppani and Loveday agreed that matters of international trade and
protectionism should be at the forefront of the EFO's agenda. Building upon
Salter's shift in 1929 towards acknowledgement of the validity of regionalism,
they posited that genuine progress would not involve all member states at the
same time but rather occur "between those States where there is a desire to do
business" as Loveday put it in a 1938 address. For that reason, EFO staff was
wary about the organization of the London Economic Conference, which had been
decided outside of the League framework at the Lausanne Conference of 1932 and
indeed ended in comprehensive failure. The EFO made renewed advocacy efforts
in 1935 and 1936 for a reduction of trade restrictions on the basis of the
most favoured nation principle, but that was rejected primarily by Britain, to
the frustration of the United States which under Secretary of State Cordell
Hull has swung back towards freer trade.

Even so, the League's advocacy, which included a plea for devaluation of the
gold bloc currencies, played a key role in the Tripartite Agreement of 1936.
The agreement’s text repeated much of prior EFO reports' language, and
facilitated the simultaneous French policy pivot towards a more liberal trade
stance. From 1937, after the Tripartite Agreement had only produced
disappointing results, the EFO endeavored to secure more autonomy for itself
within the League that would transform it into an autonomous agency along
similar lines as the International Labour Organization, but to no avail in the
League's fast-deteriorating environment.

## Economic research and statistics

The EFO kept employing numerous talented economists in its staff, such as
Gottfried Haberler, Jan Tinbergen, John B. Condliffe, and Ragnar Nurkse.
Canada's Louis Rasminsky had joined the EFO in 1930, and would stay until
1939. James Meade served as specialist adviser on behalf of the British
government. Jacques J. Polak was on the staff from 1938 to 1943. In the late
1930s, the EFO hired Oskar Morgenstern, Bertil Ohlin, and Jacques Rueff as
outside experts for its influential work on economic depressions. Other
economists who worked at the EFO and would attain later fame, often at the
IMF, included Marcus Fleming, Alvin Hansen, Folke Hilgerdt, and Tjalling
Koopmans.

Throughout the 1930s and early 1940s, similarly as the Bank for International
Settlements which had started operations in 1930, the EFO also produced major
statistical and analytical works, both ad-hoc investigations and periodical
series of its specialized arm the Economic Intelligence Service (EIS, French:
_Service d'études économiques_). It pioneered the nascent field of open-
economy macroeconomics. From 1933, its research on business cycles was further
supported by annual grants from the Rockefeller Foundation. Regular EIS
publications included the _Statistical Yearbook of the League of Nations_ ,
the _Monthly Bulletin of Statistics, Money and Banking_ , the _Review of World
Trade_ , and from 1936 on, an annual report on the general economic situation.
Many of these series were subsequently continued by the United Nations. The
EFO's _World Economic Survey_ , prepared by Condliffe in the early 1930s and
then Meade in 1938-1940, has been labeled the ancestor of the IMF's flagship
publication _World Economic Outlook_.

## Wartime relocation and postwar legacy

In May 1940, Switzerland was increasingly at risk of being encircled by the
Axis powers. Loveday decided to move together with around two-thirds of the
EFO staff,, and eventually relocated the organization at the Institute for
Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey. The Institute's director Frank
Aydelotte persuaded the U.S. Department of State about the move, deftly
invoking the memory of Woodrow Wilson and his associations with both Princeton
and the League, and secured funding from the Rockefeller Foundation. At
Princeton, the exiled EFO played a central role in shaping the work of the
United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration, established in 1943,
and had influence in the preparation of the Bretton Woods Conference and,
beyond its own absorption into the United Nations in 1945, the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade in 1947. Loveday attended Bretton Woods as an
external observer, and several former EFO staff were among the national
negotiators, including Rasminsky for Canada and Polak for the Netherlands. In
the assessment of Louis Pauly, "The final economic studies of the League
contributed to a new consensus that ultimately found its authoritative
expression in the 1944 Bretton Woods Agreement and in the 1947 Havana
Charter". That included, in particular, Nurske's landmark study on the
macroeconomic history of the interwar period.

The assessment of the EFO and its impact has ebbed and flowed since its
absorption by the nascent United Nations in 1945. In a monograph published
shortly afterwards, William Martin Hill, who had joined the EFO staff in 1927,
noted that "Consultation between officials engaged in framing and executing
economic and social policies in different countries was rare before 1914;
through the League it became an established practice". The memory of the EFO
and its partial successes was then somewhat obscured during the Cold War
period by the incentives to emphasize the League's institutional limitations
in contrast with the more robust western postwar order, including by Salter
himself in his memoirs published in 1961.

In his 1996 study, Pauly notes the parallels between the successes and
limitations of the EFO and those of the IMF, noting that both had to adapt to
major financial disruptions, respectively the 1931 crisis and Great
Depression, and the Nixon shock of 1971. He argues that both institutions
pivoted towards analytical work following the respective setbacks, but also
that the memory of the ultimate failure of the League helped the IMF find a
new mandate in the 1980s when it played a central role in addressing the Latin
American debt crisis. He also notes that neither the League nor the IMF were
allowed to intervene directly in situations deemed too critically sensitive by
their most powerful stakeholders, such as the German reparations which were
(mis)handled in a separate series of international conferences in which the
EFO had little or no influence.

More recent scholarship, not least by historian Patricia Clavin, has
emphasized the EFO's pioneering initiatives, its policy achievements including
during the 1930s, and its role in fostering an epistemic community that would
be critically influential in post-World War II developments.