International cooperative community

The **Energy Community** , commonly referred to as the **Energy Community for
South East Europe** (**ECSEE**), is an international organization consisting
of the European Union (EU) and a number of non-EU countries. It aims to extend
the EU internal energy market to wider Southeast Europe. The members commit to
implement relevant EU energy _acquis communautaire_ , to develop an adequate
regulatory framework and to liberalize their energy markets in line with the
_acquis_ under the founding Treaty.

## Aim

The Energy Community aims at establishing a Pan-European energy market by
extending the energy _acquis_ of the European Union to the territories of
Southeast and Eastern Europe. The Energy Community legal framework covers
legislation in the fields of energy, environment, and competition of the EU
legislation.

After entry into force, the treaty _acquis_ has been extended on several
occasions. It now also includes legislation in relation to security of supply,
energy efficiency, oil, renewable energy, statistics, infrastructure and
climate.

In line with the update at the EU level, the Energy Community transposes and
implements the EU's Third Energy Package since September 2011. The 2021
Ministerial Council adopted five key legislative acts stemming from the EU's
Clean energy for all Europeans package. Renewables, energy efficiency and
greenhouse gas reduction targets for 2030 will be adopted at the next
Ministerial Council in 2022, following the finalization of a study by the
European Commission.

## Parties, participants and observers

### Parties

Parties to the Energy Community Treaty are the European Union and nine
Contracting Parties (date of ratification):  
  
---  
  
  * European Union (29 May 2006) and
  * Albania (24 May 2006)
  * Bosnia and Herzegovina (20 September 2006)
  * Kosovo (23 December 2005)
  * Moldova (17 March 2010)

|

  * Montenegro (15 December 2006)
  * North Macedonia (29 May 2006)
  * Serbia (9 August 2006)
  * Ukraine (15 December 2010)
  * Georgia (1 July 2017)

  
  
After having obtained the observer status, Moldova and Ukraine formally
expressed their interest in full membership. Mandated by the Ministerial
Council, the European Commission had the first round of formal negotiations
with Moldova and Ukraine in late 2008. After three negotiation rounds, the
technical negotiations were concluded in 2009. The Ministerial Council,
however, made the membership conditional on legislative amendments. In
concrete terms, it requested both countries to revise their gas laws and to
align them with the EU's Gas Directive 2003/55/EC. Whilst Moldova became a
full-fledged member as of 1 May 2010, Ukraine officially acceded to the Energy
Community on 1 February 2011.

Georgia applied for full membership in 2014 and joined the organization as a
fully-fledged member on 1 July 2017.

### Observers

Any other neighbouring third country can obtain an observer status upon
approval of a reasoned request by the Ministerial Council. A separate
Procedural Act regulates the rights and obligations of the observers to the
Treaty. The observers to the treaty are:  
  
---  
  
  * Norway (November 2006)
  * Turkey (November 2006)
  * Armenia (October 2011)

  
  
### Participants

Pursuant to the treaty, any EU member state may obtain the status of a
participant. In doing so, the EU member state has the right to attend the
Ministerial Council, the Permanent High Level Group, the Regulatory Board and
the fora and participate in the discussions in these bodies. This privilege is
used by 19 EU member states, namely  
  
---  
  
  * Austria (17 November 2006)
  * Bulgaria (1 January 2007)
  * Croatia (17 July 2013)
  * Cyprus (17 November 2006)
  * Czech Republic (17 November 2006)
  * Finland (24 October 2013)

|

  * France (18 December 2007)
  * Germany (17 November 2006)
  * Greece (17 November 2006)
  * Hungary (17 November 2006)
  * Italy (17 November 2006)
  * Latvia (23 September 2014)
  * Lithuania (16 October 2015)

|

  * Netherlands (29 June 2007)
  * Poland (6 October 2011)
  * Romania (1 January 2007)
  * Slovenia (17 November 2006)
  * Slovakia (17 November 2006)
  * Sweden (23 September 2014)

  
  
Following their accession to the European Union, three of the original treaty
signatories, Bulgaria, Croatia and Romania, have matured from a Contracting
Party to a Participant.

## Institutions

The main institutions established by the treaty are:

  * Ministerial Council
  * Permanent High Level Group
  * Energy Community Regulatory Board (ECRB)
  * Fora
  * Secretariat

### Ministerial Council

The Ministerial Council is the principal decision-making institution of the
Energy Community. It takes the key policy decisions and adopts the Energy
Community's rules and procedures. The Ministerial Council is composed of one
representative from each Contracting Party, usually the Minister responsible
for energy, and of two representatives from the European Union, the European
Commissioner for Energy and a high-level representative of the Presidency of
the European Union.

Following a decision in December 2009, the Ministerial Council meets once a
year. Moreover, the Presidency of the council is held in turn by each
contracting party for a term of 12 months. For the period of 1 January to 31
December 2021, Serbia holds the presidency in office and chairs the key
institutional meetings.

### Permanent High Level Group

The Permanent High Level Group brings together senior officials from each
Contracting Party and two representatives of the European Commission. It
ensures the continuity of and follow-up to the political meetings by the
ministers and decides, in certain cases, on implementing measures.

### Energy Community Regulatory Board

The Regulatory Board is composed of high level representatives from the
national energy regulatory agencies of the Energy Community Contracting
Parties, Observers and Participants. It advises the Energy Community
Ministerial Council and Permanent High Level Group (PHLG) on details of
statutory, technical and regulatory rules and makes recommendations in the
case of cross-border disputes between regulators. The Board can take
regulatory measures when empowered by the Energy Community Ministerial
Council.

The Board is currently chaired by its President (2020-2023), Mr Marko
Bislimoski, President of the Energy and Water Services Regulatory Commission
of the Republic of North Macedonia. The European Union, represented by the
European Commission, acts as vice-president and is assisted by the Agency for
the Cooperation of Energy Regulators (ACER). The Regulatory Board meets in
Athens. Its work is supported by the Energy Community Secretariat.

### Fora

The fora have the task to advise the Energy Community. Chaired by the European
Commission, a forum brings together all interested stakeholders from the
industry, regulators, industry associations and consumers. Their conclusions,
agreed by consensus, are addressed to the Permanent High Level Group.

The establishment of the fora reflects the process leading to the creation of
the Energy Community. The Athens Electricity Forum, previously known as South
East Europe Energy Regulation Forum, met for the first time in 2002. The terms
governing the Gas Forum were established in 2006. It was decided that the Gas
Forum shall convene in Slovenia. The first Social Forum took place in November
2008. At its December 2008 meeting, the Ministerial Council decided to adopt
oil stock legislation and to establish the Oil Forum. The first Oil Forum
convened in 2009 in Belgrade. Recently, also a Vienna Law Forum, Just
Transition Forum and Dispute Resolution Forum have been established.

### Secretariat

The day-to-day activities of the Energy Community are administered by the
Secretariat. The Secretariat assists the Contracting Parties in their
implementation of the acquis. The Secretariat supports the Contracting Parties
in the drafting of legislation and conducts expert missions when requested by
the national authorities. The Secretariat organizes annually over 60 events,
including institutional meetings and expert workshops.

Each year the Secretariat submits an Annual Implementation Report to the
Ministerial Council of the Energy Community, which assesses the compliance of
each Contracting Party with respect to its obligations under the treaty. If a
Contracting Party fails to comply with its treaty obligations, the Secretariat
may open an infringement procedure.

Since 1 December 2021, the director of the Secretariat is Mr Artur Lorkowski.
Mr Lorkowski is the third Energy Community director, following Mr Janez Kopač
(2012-2021) and Mr Slavtcho Neykov (2007-2012). The director of the
Secretariat is responsible for ensuring that the Energy Community budget – to
which all Parties contribute – is correctly spent and accounted for. The
director also selects and appoints the staff on the basis of the approved
establishment plan of the Energy Community. As of December 2021, the
Secretariat has 34 staff members holding 18 nationalities.

The Secretariat has its seat in Vienna, Austria.

### Role of the European Union

Represented by the European Commission, the European Union holds the permanent
Vice-Presidency of the Energy Community. The European Commission assists the
Presidency in the chairing of the Permanent High Level Group and the
Ministerial Council and the preparation of agendas of all institutional
meetings. At the annual Ministerial Council meeting, the European Commission
is represented by the Commissioner for Energy. The European Union is the
largest contributor to the Energy Community budget. Its contribution is nearly
95 per cent.

## History

The roots of the Energy Community Treaty go back to the South-East Europe
Regional Energy Market for electricity and natural gas formed originally in
the framework of the Stability Pact for South Eastern Europe through the
Athens Memorandum. To this end, the _establishment of the Energy Community
represents a very important political step in a key economic sector before the
accession of the SEE countries to the EU_. The institutional setting of the
Energy Community shows great parallels to the structures of the European
Union. _It was in the negotiations for this treaty that the Commission
"reproduced" the institutions that were created by the founding fathers of the
European Communities and reproduced its own institutions outside its borders_.
On the occasion of the signing of the Treaty, the European Commission stated
that _the Energy Community Treaty is consciously modelled on the European
Steel and Coal Community that was the genesis for the European Union_.

### Athens Memorandum

The 'Athens Memorandum' refers to the memorandum of understanding of 2002 and
its revision of 2003, signed in Athens. It was proposed by the European Union
and it outlined the principles and the institutional necessities for regional
electricity market development in South East Europe. Following intense
discussions, an agreement was reached at the first South East Europe
Electricity Regulation Forum in June 2002. The signing of the memorandum took
place in November 2002 by Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia,
Greece, FYR of Macedonia, Romania, Serbia and Montenegro, and Turkey.

The 2003 revision added natural gas to the scope of work. Under the Athens
Memorandum a South-East Europe Regional Energy Market was envisioned to form
part of the EU's internal energy market. The Athens Memorandum also set up a
number of institutions, which collectively are known as the 'Athens Process'.
In 2004, the Athens Forum meeting decided to name the process 'Energy
Community'. at the same time the location of future institutions was agreed.

### Energy Community Treaty

In May 2004, the European Union opened negotiations with the countries of the
south-eastern European region to conclude a legal agreement. The negotiations
took place between the European Community on one side, and Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, FYR of Macedonia, Republic of Montenegro,
Serbia, Romania, Turkey and UNMIK on behalf of Kosovo on the other side. The
treaty establishing the Energy Community was signed in Athens, Greece, on 25
October 2005. Signature of the treaty was approved by the European Parliament
on 29 May 2006. The treaty subsequently entered into force on 1 July 2006.

According to Article 97, the Treaty is concluded for a period of 10 years from
the date of entry into force. In October 2013, the Energy Community
Ministerial Council unilaterally decided to extend the duration of the treaty
by ten years, to 2026.

On this occasion, the Ministerial Council also established a High Level
Reflection Group, which was mandated to assess the adequacy of the
institutional set up and working methods of the Energy Community in achieving
the objectives of the Treaty. The Reflection Group published on 11 June 2014
its final report “ _An Energy Community for the Future_ ”, outlining
recommendations on how the Energy Community could be improved. A roadmap has
been adopted as to how these proposals should be taken forward.

## Critics

The treaty has been criticized by the European Public Service Union as it
lacks a social dimension. The Energy Community _acquis_ makes an explicit
reference to public service obligations and customer protection. Whilst the
Treaty may lack a legally binding _acquis_ on social dialogue, the Contracting
Parties have a legally binding obligation to foster social dimension within
the process. In October 2007, the Parties signed the Memorandum of
Understanding on Social Issues in the context of Energy Community. The
Memorandum recognizes that economic development and social progress are
mutually linked and should go hand in hand. It also spells out the importance
and the necessity to involve social partners in the reform process. Ukraine
and Moldova signed the Declaration of Memorandum of Understanding on Social
Issues in October 2011.

Environmental organizations from south-eastern Europe criticized the process
in December 2008 as they believed that the ECSEE contains insufficient
safeguard mechanisms to ensure that the well-intentioned promotion of energy
efficiency and renewable energy is not drowned out by the promotion of large
and often environmentally harmful coal and hydropower plants. The Energy
Community Ministerial Council decided to establish a task force in energy
efficiency in 2007. It was renamed in 2013 to Energy Efficiency Coordination
Group (EECG), providing a broad platform for cooperation between
representatives of ministries and agencies in charge for energy and energy
efficiency from Contracting Parties, Observer Countries and Participants.
Since 2009 the Energy Community implements the core EU energy efficiency
_acquis_. In the area of renewable energy the discussion to adopt the EU
renewable energy directive started already in 2008. The Ministerial Council
established a renewable energy task force in 2009 and adopted the Directive
2009/28/EC with binding renewable energy targets for 2020 in October 2012. In
October 2015, the ministers decided to re-establish the renewable energy task
force. The Energy Community Task Force on Environment has been operational
since Spring 2011.