Economic union of countries in Eurasia

The **Eurasian Economic Union** (**EAEU** or **EEU**) is an economic union of
five post-Soviet states located in Eurasia. The EAEU has an integrated single
market. As of 2023, it consists of 183 million people and a gross domestic
product of over $2.4 trillion.

The Treaty on the Eurasian Economic Union was signed on 29 May 2014 by the
leaders of Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Russia, and came into force on 1 January
2015. Treaties aiming for Armenia's and Kyrgyzstan's accession to the Eurasian
Economic Union were signed on 9 October and 23 December 2014, respectively.
Armenia's accession treaty came into force on 2 January 2015. Kyrgyzstan's
accession treaty came into effect on 6 August 2015. Kyrgyzstan participated in
the EAEU from the day of its establishment as an acceding state.

The EAEU encourages the free movement of goods and services, and provides for
common policies in the macroeconomic sphere, transport, industry and
agriculture, energy, foreign trade and investment, customs, technical
regulation, competition, and antitrust regulation. Provisions for a single
currency and greater integration are envisioned for the future. The union
operates through supranational and intergovernmental institutions. The Supreme
Eurasian Economic Council is the supreme body of the Union, consisting of the
Heads of the Member States. The second level of intergovernmental institutions
is represented by the Eurasian Intergovernmental Council (consisting of the
Heads of the governments of member states). The day-to-day work of the EAEU is
done through the Eurasian Economic Commission, the executive body of the
Union. There is also a judicial body – the Court of the Eurasian Economic
Union.

## History

### Background

In the Soviet Union, a Union Republic was a constituent federated political
entity with a system of government called a Soviet republic, which was
officially defined in the 1977 constitution as "a sovereign Soviet socialist
state which has united with the other Soviet republics to form the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics" and whose sovereignty is limited by membership in
the Union. As a result of its status as a sovereign state, the Union Republic
de jure had the right to enter into relations with foreign states, conclude
treaties with them and exchange diplomatic and consular representatives and
participate in the activities of international organizations (including
membership in international organizations). The former Soviet republics that
became independent states were part of the economy of the Soviet Union with
its common technical standards, common infrastructure, territorial proximity,
chains of cooperation, and common legal heritage. Through the signing of
international agreements on trade, economic cooperation and integration,
countries can achieve an increase in the efficiency of their economies, which
suffered due to the disintegration of the Soviet Union. At the same time, all
post-Soviet countries have moved to a market economy, implemented reforms and
expanded trade and cooperation with the global economy. Over the past three
decades, several negotiations have taken place on proposed integration
projects.

In order to reform the Soviet Union, the New Union Treaty and the draft
European-Asian Union, among others, were proposed. In 1989, the European-Asian
Union was proposed by the co-chairman of the Interregional Deputy Group Andrei
Sakharov, Nobel Peace Prize laureate, and with the participation of members of
the group Galina Starovoitova (as a representative to the Congress of People's
Deputies of the Soviet Union from Armenia), Anatoly Sobchak and others.
Sakharov presented Gorbachev (Gorbachev was a chairman of the Constitutional
Commission) with his draft Constitution of the Union of Soviet Republics of
Europe and Asia on 27 November 1989.

In the 1990s, Russia and the Central Asian republics were weakened
economically and faced declines in GDP as a result of the collapse of the
Soviet Union. The member states of the union underwent economic reforms and
privatisation. The process of Eurasian integration began immediately after the
break-up of the Soviet Union. When the USSR began to fall in 1991, the
presidents of Belarus, Kazakhstan and Russia of the founding republics signed
the Belavezha Accords on 8 December 1991, declaring that the Soviet Union
would cease to exist and proclaimed the Commonwealth of Independent States in
its place.

### Commonwealth of Independent States

Meeting of the leaders of all 12 countries of the Commonwealth of Independent
States (CIS) on 22 February 2008. The CIS initiated the lengthy process of
Eurasian integration. The 1995 Agreement on the bilateral Customs Union
between Russia and Belarus and the 1995 Agreement on the bilateral Customs
Union between Kazakhstan and the combined customs territory of Russia and
Belarus in the database of international treaties of the Eurasian Economic
Union

According to Article 7 of the Agreement on the creation the Commonwealth of
Independent States of 8 December 1991 which effectively dissolved the Soviet
Union as a single federal country, the High Contracting Parties indicate that
through common coordinating institutions, their joint activities will consist
in coordinating foreign policy activities, _cooperation in the formation and
development of a common economic space, common European and Eurasian markets,
in the field of customs policy_ , in the development of transport and
communication systems, cooperation in the field of environmental protection,
migration policy and the fight against organized crime. According to the
Article 5 of Belavezha Accords, the High Contracting Parties shall recognize
and respect each other's territorial integrity and the inviolability of
existing borders within the Commonwealth. They shall guarantee the openness of
borders, freedom of movement of citizens and freedom of information within the
Commonwealth. On 24 September 1993, at a meeting of the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS) Council of Heads of State in Moscow, Azerbaijan,
Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Russia, Tajikistan,
Uzbekistan signed the Treaty on the creation of an Economic Union which
reinforces by an international agreement the intention to create an economic
union through the step-by-step creation of a free trade area, a customs union
and conditions for the free movement of goods, services, capital and labor.
All these countries have ratified the Treaty and it entered into force on
January 14, 1994. Turkmenistan and Georgia joined in 1994 and ratified the
Treaty, but Georgia withdrew in 2009. On 15 April 1994, the "Agreement on
Ukraine's accession to the Economic Union as an associate member" was signed
by Azerbaijan, Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Russia,
Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, Ukraine and Georgia but never entered
into force due to non-ratification by Russia, Ukraine, Turkmenistan and
Georgia, although all the others ratified. On 15 April 1994, at a meeting of
the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) Council of Heads of State in
Moscow, all 12 post-Soviet states signed the international Agreement on the
Establishment of a Free Trade Area in order to move towards the creation of an
economic union. Article 17 also confirmed the intention to conclude a free
trade agreement in services. Article 1 indicated that this was "the first
stage of the creation of the Economic Union", but in 1999 the countries agreed
to remove this phrase from the agreement.

Russian Federation - Belarus - Kazakhstan Agreement of 1995 on Customs Union
in the Regional Trade Agreements Database of the World Trade Organization

### Proposal to establish a new organization

Timeline of EAEU Integration from the World Trade Organization report

On 29 March 1994, during a speech at Moscow State University, the first
President of Kazakhstan, Nursultan Nazarbayev complained that the CIS was
inadequate and did not provide the integration that the countries badly
needed. He proposed the creation of a Eurasian Union of States as a new
organization completely separate from the CIS. The Eurasian Union of States
was proposed as a combination of the economic union and political union. For
the first time it was suggested to use the name “Eurasian” for an economic
union rather than “Euro-Asian” or “Euroasian”. The Eurasian Economic Union
traces its history back to Nazarbayev's proposal. He suggested the idea of
creating a Union as a regional trade bloc in order to connect to and profit
from the growing economies of Europe and East Asia. The vision would be to
simplify the free flow of goods across Eurasia. The idea was quickly seen as a
way to bolster trade, boost investment in Central Asia, Armenia and Belarus,
and serve as a complement to the Eastern Partnership.

### Customs union and integration in economic and humanitarian fields

During the 1990s, the Eurasian integration process was slow, possibly due to
the economic crisis experienced after the dissolution of the Soviet Union and
the size of the countries involved (Russia, Belarus and Kazakhstan cover an
area of about 20 million km2). As a result, numerous treaties have been signed
by member states to establish the regional trade bloc gradually.

In 1995, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Russia, and later acceding states Kyrgyzstan and
Tajikistan signed the first agreements on the establishment of a Customs
Union. Its purpose was to gradually lead the way toward the creation of open
borders without passport controls between member states.

In 1996, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Russia and Kyrgyzstan signed the Treaty on
Increased Integration in the Economic and Humanitarian Fields to begin
economic integration between countries to allow for the creation of common
markets for goods, services, capital, labour, and developing single transport,
energy and information systems.

In 1999, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Russia, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan signed the
Treaty on the Customs Union and the Single Economic Space by clarifying the
goals and policies the states would undertake in order to form the Eurasian
Customs Union and the Single Economic Space.

### Eurasian Economic Community and supranational competence

A session of the Supreme Eurasian Economic Council (composed of the union's
heads of state) is held at least once every year.

To promote further economic integration and more cooperation, in 2000 Belarus,
Kazakhstan, Russia, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan established the Eurasian
Economic Community (EurAsEC) which Uzbekistan joined in 2006. The EurAsEC
headquarters according to the Treaty were located in Moscow and Astana. The
treaty established a common market for its member states. The Eurasian
Economic Community was modelled on the European Economic Community. The two
had a comparable population size of 171 million and 169 million, respectively.

The separate Treaty on a Single Economic Space by Belarus, Kazakhstan, Russia
and Ukraine (or Common Economic Zone Agreement), signed in 2003 and entered
into force in 2004, with proposed headquarters in Kiev was in the process of
implementation, but it was stalled after the Orange revolution and new
president of Ukraine. Ukraine has not been involved in previous agreements and
treaties. It was decided to proceed without Ukraine after 2005. The withdrawal
of Ukraine from this Treaty de jure took effect on 21 July 2023.

In 2007, Belarus, Kazakhstan and Russia signed an agreement to create a
Customs Union between the three countries. The supranational commission of the
customs union was established and given supranational competencies.

### Common external tariff and Customs Code

The Customs Union of Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Russia (now the Eurasian Customs
Union) came into existence on 1 January 2010. The Customs Union's priorities
were the elimination of intra-bloc tariffs, establishing a common external
tariff policy and the elimination of non-tariff barriers. It was launched as a
first step towards forming a broader single market inspired by the European
Union, with the objective of forming an alliance between former Soviet states.
The member states planned to continue with economic integration and were set
to remove all customs borders between each other after July 2011.

### Four economic freedoms and Eurasian Economic Commission

The signing ceremony of the Treaty on the Eurasian Economic Union (in Astana,
Kazakhstan, on 29 May 2014)

On 1 January 2012, the three states established the Eurasian Economic Space
which ensures the effective functioning of a single market for goods,
services, capital and labour, and to establish coherent industrial, transport,
energy and agricultural policies. The agreement included a roadmap for future
integration and established the Eurasian Economic Commission (modelled on the
European Commission). The Eurasian Economic Commission serves as the
regulatory agency for the Eurasian Customs Union, the Single Economic Space
and the Eurasian Economic Union.

In 2011, the then-Prime Minister of Russia, Vladimir Putin, announced his
support for Nursultan Nazarbayev's idea for the creation of a Eurasian
Economic Union. On 18 November 2011, the presidents of Belarus, Kazakhstan,
and Russia signed an agreement setting a target of establishing the Eurasian
Economic Union by 2015. The member states put together a joint commission on
fostering closer economic ties.

On 29 May 2014, the presidents of Kazakhstan, Belarus and Russia signed the
treaty on the Eurasian Economic Union, which came into effect on 1 January
2015. The presidents of Armenia and Kyrgyzstan were also present at the
signing ceremony. Russian president Vladimir Putin stated, "Today we have
created a powerful, attractive centre of economic development, a big regional
market that unites more than 170 million people." Kazakh politicians
emphasized the Eurasian Economic Union was not intended to be a political
bloc, but a purely economic union. Bakytzhan Sagintayev, the first deputy
prime minister of Kazakhstan and lead negotiator, said, "We are not creating a
political organisation; we are forming a purely economic union." He further
stated "it is a pragmatic means to get benefits. We don't meddle into what
Russia is doing politically, and they cannot tell us what foreign policy to
pursue." By October, the treaty had received parliamentary approval from all
three states. On 9 October 2014, a Treaty to enlarge the EAEU to Armenia was
signed. Kyrgyzstan signed the Treaty on 23 December 2014 and became a member
of the Eurasian Union on 6 August 2015.

### Treaty on the Eurasian Economic Union

The Eurasian Economic Union in the Regional Trade Agreements Database of the
World Trade Organization

The Treaty on the Eurasian Economic Union (EAEU Treaty) entered into force on
1 January 2015.

Many provisions and separate agreements were codified, consolidated and
incorporated into the EAEU Treaty and the EAEU's legal framework (officially
"EAEU Treaty and international agreements within the EAEU" according to the
database of law of the Eurasian Economic Union), some agreements were
terminated and replaced, but some older agreements are still in force in part
not contrary to the Treaty on the Eurasian Economic Union (officially "Other
international treaties" according to the database of law of the Eurasian
Economic Union). The Customs Union of the Eurasian Economic Union is now
regulated by Part Two of the Treaty on the Eurasian Economic Union (which
entered into force on 1 January 2015), EAEU Customs Code, other international
agreements and by decisions of supranational bodies as Supreme Eurasian
Economic Council, Intergovernmental Council and Eurasian Economic Commission.

The Eurasian Economic Community was terminated on 1 January 2015.

## Structural evolution

Treaties and development stages of Eurasian Economic Union  Year  | Signed documents   
---|---  
1995  | Treaty on the Customs Union between Belarus and Russia   
Treaty on the Customs Union between Kazakhstan and Russia  
1996  | Agreement on Increased Integration in the Economic and Humanitarian Fields Belarus, Kazakhstan, Russia, Kyrgyzstan   
1999  | Treaty on the Customs Union and the Single Economic Space Belarus, Kazakhstan, Russia, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan   
(Agreement to complete the formation of the Customs Union and the Single
Economic Space)  
2000  | Treaty on the establishment of the Eurasian Economic Community (EurAsEC) Belarus, Kazakhstan, Russia, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan   
2003  | Treaty on forming the Single Economic Space Belarus, Kazakhstan, Russia, Ukraine   
2007  | Treaty on the Commission of the Customs Union Belarus, Kazakhstan, Russia   
Treaty on the Establishment of the Integrated Customs Territory and Creation
of the Customs Union Belarus, Kazakhstan, Russia  
2010  | Establishment of the Customs Union Belarus, Kazakhstan, Russia   
2011  | Treaty on the Eurasian Economic Commission Belarus, Kazakhstan, Russia   
The decision of the Supreme Eurasian Economic Council on the entry of
international agreements into force forming the legal base of the Customs
Union and Single Economic Space Belarus, Kazakhstan, Russia  
Declaration on Eurasian Economic Integration Belarus, Kazakhstan, Russia  
2012  | Establishment of the Single Economic Space Belarus, Kazakhstan, Russia   
Eurasian Economic Commission started functioning  
2015  | Establishment of the Eurasian Economic Union   
The agreement on the Eurasian Economic Union  
  
## Membership

Member states of the Eurasian Economic Union

Observer states

Candidate states

Country  | Accession date  | Date of signature   
---|---|---  
Armenia | 2 January 2015 | 10 October 2014  
Belarus | 1 January 2015 | 29 May 2014  
Kazakhstan | 1 January 2015 | 29 May 2014  
Kyrgyzstan | 12 August 2015 | 23 December 2014  
Russia | 1 January 2015 | 29 May 2014  
  
The treaty establishing the Eurasian Economic Union was formally signed by
three states which were part of the former Soviet Union: Belarus, Kazakhstan,
and Russia. Agreements to enlarge the EAEU to the other post-Soviet states of
Armenia and Kyrgyzstan were signed on 9 October and 23 December 2014,
respectively. For Kyrgyzstan, facilitation of labour migration regulations
with Russia was seen as the main benefit of joining the Eurasian Economic
Union. The population migration indicator had an inverse dependence with GDP
per capita, consumer price index, minimum wage, and unemployment rate.

Armenia announced its decision to join the Eurasian Customs Union in September
2013. President Serj Sargsyan announced the decision after talks with his
Russian counterpart President Vladimir Putin in Moscow. The treaty enlarging
the EAEU to Armenia was signed on 9 October 2014. By signing this contract,
Armenia has accepted corresponding application, and thereby gained access to
the EAEU single market with a population of 170 million citizens. Armenia is
the only country of the EAEU that has no common border with the other member
states of the union. Georgia guaranteed a free transit corridor for exporting
its goods to the Eurasian Economic Union, Armenian deputy economic minister
Emil Tarasyan stated.

Moldova was granted observer status in April 2017.

Uzbekistan and Cuba became observer members on 11 December 2020. In December
2022, Russian prime minister Mishustin mentioned the advantages of Uzbek full
membership in EAEU. By February 2023, Uzbek prime minister Aripov announced
the completion of the preparatory work to ensure harmonization of national
technical regulations with the EAEU standards.

Iran was designated as an observer member by the leaders of the five Eurasian
Union member states during a meeting in St. Petersburg on December 26, 2024.
The event was also attended by Mohammad Atabek, Iran's Minister of Industry,
Mines, and Trade. According to Bakytjan Sagintayev, Chairman of the Eurasian
Economic Commission, Iranian exports to the Eurasian Union rose by 8 percent,
while imports from the Union to Iran experienced a 16 percent increase.

On 12 February 2025, Armenia's parliament approved a bill officially endorsing
Armenia's EU accession. In response, Russian Deputy Prime Minister Alexey
Overchuk stated "the EU accession process will mark the beginning of Armenia's
withdrawal from the Eurasian Economic Union."

### Presidency

Each year, a member state is elected chairman to head the Union. Chairmanship
is passed from country to country in alphabetical order in the Russian
language. Belarus currently holds the chairmanship.

Year  | #  | Country  | Head of state or government  | Major trade agreements   
---|---|---|---|---  
2015  | 1st  |  Belarus | Alexander Lukashenko |  Vietnam  
2016  | 2nd  |  Kazakhstan | Nursultan Nazarbayev | none   
2017  | 3rd  |  Kyrgyzstan | Almazbek Atambayev (until 1 December)   
Sooronbay Jeenbekov (from 1 December)  
2018  | 4th  |  Russia | Vladimir Putin |  China,  Iran  
2019  | 5th  |  Armenia[_citation needed_] | Nikol Pashinyan |  Serbia,  Singapore  
2020  | 6th  |  Belarus | Alexander Lukashenko |   
2021  | 7th  |  Kazakhstan | Kassym-Jomart Tokayev |   
2022  | 8th  |  Kyrgyzstan | Sadyr Japarov |   
2023  | 9th  |  Russia | Vladimir Putin |   
2024  | 10th  |  Armenia | Nikol Pashinyan |   
2025  | 11th  |  Belarus | Alexander Lukashenko |   
  
### Enlargement

Russian President Vladimir Putin has stated that Russia's goal was to enlarge
the customs union to all post-Soviet states, excluding the three Baltic EU
member states. According to _The Guardian_ newspaper, Russia's plan is for the
Eurasian Union to grow into a "powerful, supra-national union" of sovereign
states like the European Union, uniting economies, legal systems, customs
services, and military capabilities to form a bridge between Europe and Asia
to balance the EU and the U.S.

In May 2015, an integration agreement was signed between the Russian
Federation and South Ossetia. If South Ossetia were to join, it would be by
acceding to the Russian Federation[_citation needed_]. In 2023, South Ossetia
began implementing and integrating the EAEU's common tariffs.

Tajikistan was formally invited to join the union and has expressed its
interest in acceding. It is recognized as a potential candidate and membership
negotiations are underway. In 2015, further efforts were made to integrate
Tajikistan into the EAEU.

> It took Europe 40 years to move from the European Coal and Steel Community
> to the full European Union. The establishment of the Customs Union and the
> Common Economic Space is proceeding at a much faster pace because we could
> draw on the experience of the EU and other regional associations. We see
> their strengths and weaknesses. And this is our obvious advantage since it
> means we are in a position to avoid mistakes and unnecessary bureaucratic
> superstructures.

**— Vladimir Putin, "A new integration project for Eurasia: The future in the
making"** , Izvestia, 3 October 2011

Uzbekistan has been hesitant to join the Economic Union, with Uzbek officials
making opposing claims on the prospect of integration. Originally, the country
preferred not to pursue economic and political integration. Russian officials
have stated that integration with the country would be slow and analysts state
that as Russian influence and trade increases in Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan it
may persuade Uzbekistan to join in the future. Uzbekistan began its
integration process when Russia announced it would write off US$865 million
off debt owed by the country. Uzbekistan joined the Commonwealth of
Independent States Free Trade Area in 2014, meaning it has free trade with
EAEU member states. According to some sources, Uzbekistan does not intend to
become a full member of the EAEU, due to Uzbekistan's neutrality which is
enshrined in the country's legislation. In March 2020, Uzbekistan announced
that it wished to become a Eurasian Union observer state. In September 2023,
Uzbekistan estimated that it will join EAEU in 2–3 years. In October 2024, the
chair of a parliamentary commission examining the potential for Uzbekistan to
join the EAEU as a full member stated that "our conclusion is that Uzbekistan
is best served by maintaining its observer status."

Moldova, Ukraine and Georgia have been offered by both the European Union and
the Eurasian Economic Union to join their integration unions. All three
countries signed Association Agreements with the EU on 21 March 2014. However,
break-away regions of Moldova (Transnistria), Ukraine (Donetsk and
Luhansk)[_citation needed_] and Georgia (South Ossetia and Abkhazia)[_citation
needed_] have expressed a desire to join the Eurasian Customs Union and
integrate into the Eurasian Economic Union. Association Agreements with the EU
are exclusionary to EAEU observer status, as in 2017 Moldova became the EAEU's
first observer state and has attended EAEU forums in years since.

Ukraine submitted an application to participate in the Eurasian Economic Union
as an observer in August 2013. Viktor Yanukovych's decision to abandon an
association agreement with the European Union and exclusively pursue
integration with the EAEU was a key factor in the Euromaidan protests that
ended his term as president of Ukraine followed by annexation of Crimea by
Russia. The country's membership in the EAEU was seen by some analysts as the
key to the success of the union as Ukraine has the second largest economy of
any of the 15 former republics of the Soviet Union. With high tensions between
Russia and Ukraine in the wake of the crisis, Ukraine decided to pursue
integration with the EU.

Turkey was extended an invitation to join the EAEU by Kazakhstan's President
Nursultan Nazarbayev on 6 June 2014 but the country prefers to join the EU.

Georgia's Prime Minister Bidzina Ivanishvili said in September 2013 he was
studying the possibility of acceding to the Union, although he later clarified
that Georgia's main strategy was still to integrate into the European Union.
Russia's Prime Minister Dmitri Medvedev included Georgia as a prospective
member in statements made in August 2013.

The member states of the EAEU have reached an agreement with China to conjunct
the EAEU with the Belt and Road Initiative, opting for collaboration instead
of competition. There is also significant cooperation between the EAEU and
China in the areas of high technology and digitalization.

## Politics and governance

Current decision-making process of the Eurasian Customs Union and the Single
Economic Space

The Eurasian Economic Union has sought to base its model on the European
Union. All institutions carry out their work in compliance with the Treaty on
the Eurasian Economic Commission (EEC) and the international agreements that
provide the legal and regulatory framework of the Customs Union and the Single
Economic Space.

### Supreme Eurasian Economic Council

The Supreme Council, which is composed by the heads of state of the member
states, makes important decisions for the union. It approves the budget and
the distribution of the contribution of the Member States. The Supreme Council
also determines the strategy, direction and prospects of integration and takes
decisions aimed at achieving the goals of the union.

### Eurasian Economic Commission

The Eurasian Commission was established as the supranational governing body of
the Eurasian Economic Space on 1 January 2012. The commission was modelled on
the European Commission. Its headquarters are in Moscow. The commission
monitors subordinate branches and advisory bodies. Its departments were
greatly expanded on 1 January 2015, and the number of international employees
increased from 150 to 1,200.

The Eurasian Commission can take decisions on not only the customs policy of
the union, but also on the macro-economy, the competition regulations, the
energy policy and the fiscal policy of the Eurasian Economic Union. It has
strict anti-corruption laws.

The Eurasian Economic Commission consists of two bodies: the Council and the
Collegium.

#### Council

The council is composed of the Vice Prime Ministers of the member states. The
council of the Commission oversees the integration processes in the Union, and
is responsible for the overall management of the Eurasian Commission. It
monitors the commission by approving the draft budget of the union, the
maximum number of personnel, and the qualification requirements for the
commission's employees. The council convenes once every quarter.

It also considers issues of customs cooperation, trade and development of
Eurasian integration. The council regularly holds discussions on the important
aspects of the EAEU and meets with business representatives of the member
states.

#### Board

The Board is composed of ten commissioners, one of which is the chairman of
the board. Each member state provides two commissioners to the Board of the
Eurasian Commission who carry out the operational management and oversee the
everyday work of the Eurasian Commission. All ten commissioners are appointed
by the Supreme Eurasian Council for a four-year renewable term. The
commissioners also receive the status of federal ministers in their respective
countries.

The Board of the commission is the executive body of the commission. It
convenes once every week at least, and is responsible for the day-to-day
running of the Eurasian Economic Union. It has a wide range of activities,
including monitoring the implementation of treaties, submitting annual
progress reports and making recommendations. The Board also assists member
states in the settlement of disputes, and carries out the draft of the union's
budget. Part of its activities include being the intermediary between the
departments of the commission and the heads of state of the member states.

A number of departments are headed by the commissioners. The lower rank staff
is composed of 84% Russian officials, 10% Kazakhs and 6% Belarusians,
proportional to the populations of the member states. The departments enable
the Board of the Eurasian Commission to make decisions not only with regard to
customs policies, but in such areas as macroeconomics, regulation of economic
competition, energy policy and financial policy. The Commission departments
are also involved in government procurement and labour migration control.

### Parliament

As of 2015, the EAEU has no directly or indirectly elected body. In 2012, the
creation of a Eurasian parliament was under consideration. However, it was
considered too premature, and member states have instead begun harmonising
national laws and legal codes.

Russian president Vladimir Putin has upheld the idea of creating a parliament
for the union.

### Court of the Eurasian Economic Union

The Court of the Eurasian Economic Union replaced the Court of the Eurasian
Economic Community (EurAsEC Court) in 2015. It is in charge of dispute
resolution and the interpretation of the legal order within the Eurasian
Economic Union. Its headquarters is in Minsk. The court is composed of two
judges from each member state, appointed by the heads of government of the
member states. Their term of office is nine years.

### Budget

The approved budget of the Eurasian Economic Union for 2015 exceeds 6.6
billion Russian roubles. The budget is formed from contributions by the
union's member states. In 2015, 6 billion roubles will be allocated for the
activity of the Eurasian Economic Commission, 463 million roubles will be set
aside for financing the operation and further development of the EAEU
integrated information system designed to promote and inform consumers of the
EAEU's activities, and over 290 millions roubles will finance the activities
of the Court of the EAEU. Extra expenses of infrastructure and accommodation
of commission workers are financed by Russia. In addition, Russia allocated
US$1 billion to accelerate Kyrgyzstan's entry into the union. Another US$177
million was provided by Kazakhstan.

### Languages

According to Article 110 of the Treaty on the Eurasian Economic Union (2014)
the Russian language is the working language of the 'Bodies of the Union'.

## Economy  
  
---  
Top 4 largest economies (China, the US, India, Russia) in the world by PPP-
adjusted GDP in 2023  
according to the World Bank, the members of the Eurasian Economic Union as
well as  
Tajikistan and Uzbekistan that are forming a common market within the CIS
(EAEU+2)  
Selection of GDP PPP data (top 10 countries and blocs) in no particular order

### Internal market overview

The Treaty on Increased Integration in the Economic and Humanitarian Fields
signed in 1996 laid the first foundation for economic convergence. The treaty
ensured the creation of a permanent executive organ to oversee integration of
states that later would be part of the EAEU. It served as the blueprint for
the future common market for goods, services, capital and labour. The Single
Economic Space established a single market across the territory of Belarus,
Russia and Kazakhstan. In 2015 with the entry into force of the EAEU
Agreement, the single market was expanded to include Armenia and Kyrgyzstan.
The countries represent a market of some 180 million people and a combined GDP
PPP of around $5 trillion.

Eurasian Economic Union has the tenth-largest economy in the world by nominal
GDP and the fifth-largest by purchasing power parity. Since the turn of the
century, member states have experienced economic growth with GDP averaging 6%
to 8% growth between 2000 and 2007, rising again in 2010 after the 2008
financial crisis.

Since the establishment of the Eurasian Customs Union in 2010, trade between
member states rose sharply. In 2011 mutual trade was $63 billion, 33.9% more
than in 2010. In 2012, mutual trade was $68 billion and combined exports
reached $594 billion, while imports were $341 billion. The first integration
stage primarily enhanced trade among member states, bolstered economies and
created a legal and institutional foundation for the member states. The second
stage includes the free movements of goods, people, services and capital.

The Eurasian Economic Union is designed to reach a number of macroeconomic
objectives such as reducing commodity prices by reducing the cost of
transportation of raw materials, increasing return on new technologies and
products due to the increased market volume, and promoting "healthy"
competition in the common market. It is also designed to lower food prices,
increase employment in industries and increase production capacity. EAEU
members like Belarus and Kazakhstan (by its Nurly Zhol economic policy) seek
to leverage the EAEU as a bridge between the European Union and the New Silk
Road economic belt.

The Eurasian Union is considered as a major player in the world's energy
sector, raw materials, arms industry and agricultural production. In 2013
Russia was the 3rd most successful country in the world in attracting capital
from abroad.

  * The Moscow International Business Center is a commercial district in Moscow that is currently under construction. The complex includes some of Europe's tallest skyscrapers.

  * Saint Petersburg, the second-largest city and cultural capital of Russia

  * Yerevan, the capital and financial hub of Armenia

  * Almaty, the major commercial and cultural centre of Kazakhstan

  * Bishkek, the capital and financial hub of Kyrgyzstan

  * Minsk, the capital of Belarus

### Customs Union and Four Economic Freedoms

The Eurasian Conformity mark EAC

The core objective of the Single Economic Space is the development of a single
market and achieving the "four freedoms", namely the free movements of goods,
capital, services and people within the single market. The four freedoms came
into effect on 1 January 2015 (the day the Eurasian Economic Union was
officially established). The free movement of people means that citizens can
move freely among member states to live, work, study or retire.[_citation
needed_] Citizens of the member states of the union may travel to other member
states on an internal passport. Although Russia also admits access to citizens
of other CIS states without a passport, it is expected that after 2015 only
citizens of the Customs Union will have this privilege. Member states have a
common external tariff on all goods entering the market and unified methods of
valuing imported goods since the creation of the Eurasian Customs Union on 1
January 2010. Objectives include joint coordination in the area of energy,
industry, agriculture and transport.

Roughly 75% of Belarusian goods are exported, about half of which go to other
member states. Trade within the union primarily consists of Belarusian
machinery and agricultural products which are exported to Russia. Low gas
prices from Russian energy producers are guaranteed to member states or
countries wishing to join the union.

### Coordinated, harmonized and single policy

Besides free movement of goods, services, capital and labour without a work
permit ("four economic freedoms" as in the European Union), the EAEU pursues
coordinated, harmonized and single policy in the sectors determined by the
Treaty and international agreements within the Union.

### Competition

The Eurasian Economic Commission operates a competition policy to ensure equal
competitive conditions in the commodity markets of the Single Economic Space.
It also aims at harmonisation and improvement of legislation of each of the
three countries in regard to competition policy. The commission serves as the
competition regulator for the single market and is also responsible for
antitrust issues. Special regulations limit state intervention in the economy.

### Monetary union

> The increased use of the national currencies of Russia, Belarus and
> Kazakhstan and the creation of a single payment system can raise about a
> transition to a single currency for the union.

**— Rossiyskaya Gazeta, Director of Financial Policy Department of the
Eurasian Economic Commission** , 3 August 2014

Kazakhstani President Nursultan Nazarbayev had first proposed, in 2009, the
creation of a common noncash currency called "yevraz" for the Eurasian
Economic Community. It would have reportedly helped insulate the countries
from the global economic crisis. In 2012, the idea of the new joint currency
found support from Vladimir Putin and Dmitry Medvedev and by 2014 proposals
were drafted in Eurasian Commission documents for the establishment of a
Eurasian Central Bank and a common currency to be called the altyn which is to
be introduced by 2025.

When discussing the Eurasian Economic Union, Vladimir Putin said the Eurasian
Economic Union would include closer coordination of economic and monetary
policy, including the use of a common currency in the future.[_citation
needed_] Although the creation of a monetary union was not envisaged in the
Eurasian Economic Union Treaty, Russian Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev called
for the introduction of a common currency for the Eurasian Economic Union.
Leonid Slutsky, head of the State Duma's CIS committee, backed Medvedev's
proposal to start discussions on the creation of a monetary union. Slutsky
said it could be introduced shortly after 2015, when the union's structure
becomes clear. Belarusian president, Alexander Lukashenko, circulated the idea
of creating a "new euro" for the Eurasian economic bloc. In April 2014,
discussions to introduce a single currency resumed.

Russia's First Deputy Prime Minister, Igor Shuvalov, stated on 24 July 2014
that the Eurasian Economic Union will have a common currency unit in a span of
five to ten years.

### Energy

The Eurasian Economic Union is seen as an energy superpower, producing about
20.7% of the world's natural gas, and 14.6% of the world's oil and gas
condensate in 2012, making it the world's top producer in both domains. These
figures are mainly due to Russian Membership of EAEU, with Kazakhstan
contributing 1.9% and 0.6% in gas and oil production respectively.
Considerably small oil and gas reserved were discovered in Belarus while there
are no such resources in Armenia. It also produces 9% of the world's
electrical energy and 5.9% of the world's coal, making it the third and fourth
producer in the world, respectively. In Kazakhstan, energy is the leading
economic sector. The country holds about 4 billion tons of proven recoverable
oil reserves and 2,000 cubic kilometers (480 cu mi) of gas. Kazakhstan is the
world's 17th largest oil exporter and the world's 23rd largest natural gas
exporter.

Russia has the world's largest natural gas reserves, the 8th largest oil
reserves, and the second largest coal reserves. Russia is also the world's
leading natural gas exporter and the second largest natural gas producer,
while also the largest oil exporter and the largest oil producer. While trade
in oil and gas between resource-rich Russia and Kazakhstan is relatively low,
the Belarus economy is heavily dependent on the access to the Russian
hydrocarbons and – unlike the case with Kyrgyzstan and Armenia, Russia is
Belarus's main trade partner accounting for 47% of all the trade. Belarus
imports Russian crude oil (of which 45–50% were used for production of oil
products to export) and natural gas (which were not directly re-exported) for
the prices below the market ones, paying $173 for 1000 cubic meters of gas
(for comparison – $250 for Armenia, $430 for Ukraine).

By 2019, Russia, Kazakhstan, Belarus and Armenia intend to create a common
electricity market as well as a single hydrocarbons market by 2025. "With the
creation of a single hydrocarbons market, we will have a deeper coordination
that will allow us to be more competitive both in terms of pricing and in
terms of getting high value added products in this very interesting and
important market", stated Eurasian Commissioner Daniyal Akhmetov.

### Infrastructure

The Trans-Siberian Railway is a vital link between the Russian Far East and
the rest of Eurasia.

The major economic centres are Moscow, Minsk and Astana.[_citation needed_]
The distance between Moscow and Minsk is 717 kilometers, and the distance
between Moscow and Astana is 2700 kilometers, making infrastructure a key
challenge for the integration of member states. Major infrastructure projects
began during the 2000s in order to modernise and connect the regional bloc to
other markets, facilitating both integration and trade in the region. In 2007
Moscow announced it will invest US$1 trillion by 2020 to modernise the
country's infrastructure.

Kazakhstan ranks favorably in terms of kilometres of road per inhabitant as
other developed countries in the world have much less roadway per inhabitant.

Railways have been the primary way of linking countries in the Eurasian
Economic Union since the 19th century. It has always been the main way of
transport in the Russian Empire and the Soviet Union up until today. The union
ranks 2nd in the world in terms of railway trackage (about 7.8% of the world's
share). However it is still looking to improve cross-border trade within the
union.

The Eurasian Development Bank has pledged to help in the construction of
facilities to produce new generation freight cars and freight containers in
Tikhvin, Russia and in Osipovichi, Belarus to respond to the increasing demand
for rail transport. Projects have also been launched in Kazakhstan, as the
landlocked country is highly dependent on railways for trade.

The most renowned railway in the union is the Trans-Siberian Railway which
links the Russian Far East to Moscow. The Southern route also travels via
Kazakhstan.

The EAEU members cooperate with China's Digital Silk Road and have
incorporated Chinese technologies into their digital infrastructure.

The Turkestan–Siberia Railway connects the Central Asian republics to Siberia.

#### Single Eurasian Sky

The Single Eurasian Sky programme, administered by the Eurasian Economic
Commission, outlines the creation of a single market for air services and a
single air traffic zone. The single air traffic zone would make it easier for
airlines to draw up new flight paths, thereby increasing the number of flights
flying through the region. Eurasian Commissioner, Daniyal Akhmetov, said that
it would be created on a step-by-step basis. In June 2014, Belarusian Airline
Belavia stated that it was ready to move towards the development of the Single
Eurasian Sky. The terms and conditions of operation in the common aviation
market have not yet been agreed on. However, the project is likely to be
modelled on the European Union's Single European Sky. The project will
reportedly help turn the airspace of the Eurasian Union into a popular transit
hub between Europe and Southeast Asia. "We should understand that currently,
the aviation companies of Kazakhstan and Belarus are not able to compete with
Russia's aviation companies. Therefore, the programme will envisage a phasing,
creating a competitive environment and so on", Eurasian Commissioner Akhmetov
said.

### Agriculture

_A Rye Field_ by Ivan Shishkin

The Eurasian Economic Union is the top producer of sugar beet and sunflower,
producing 18.6% of the world's sugar beet and 22.7% of the world's sunflowers
in 2012, as well as a top producer of rye, barley, buckwheat, oats and
sunflower seed. It is also a large producer of potatoes, wheat and grain (and
grain legumes).

Part of the competences of the Eurasian Economic Commission are agriculture
subsidies. It is responsible for the coordination of agricultural policy-
making between member states and ensuring collective food security. The
Eurasian Development Bank finances projects to further integration and develop
agriculture. It has disbursed approximately US$470 million for projects
between 2008 and 2013.

### Projected economic impact

Past and projected GDP (nominal) per capita in EAEU countries[_citation
needed_][_dubious – discuss_]

Member states remain optimistic of the union and key partners in the region,
namely China, Iran, Turkey remain interested in it. A common belief is that
the Eurasian Economic Union has significant potential over the next two
decades, with experts predicting a 25 percent growth in the member states' GDP
by 2030, which equates to over US$600 billion. The agreement will give member
state citizens access to employment and education across the union. It will
also entail collaborative policies in many sectors, including agriculture,
energy, technology and transportation. These collaborative policies are
particularly interesting for countries in Asia seeking access to energy, trade
routes in Central Asia and Siberia, and agricultural goods.

Former president Dmitry Medvedev of Russia stated that both the positive and
negative experiences of the European Union will be taken into account and
argued that the Eurasian Union will avoid the problems of economic gaps and
disparity between countries, such as those found in the eurozone, since the
member countries have a comparable level of economic development, as well as
common history and values.

The European Union and the United States as well as other western countries
remain critical of the Eurasian Economic Union, with analysts stating that
without modernisation and real economic reforms, the union will have little
impact. The popular magazine _The Economist_ stated that the advantages of
joining the union remain unclear and further remarked "The agreement was
vague, with technical details left unresolved, making it a political show
rather than an economic one". Outlets have also stated that without Ukraine,
the Eurasian Economic Union has lost a key member state necessary to the
success of the union. Bloomberg's business magazine, Businessweek has affirmed
that joining Putin's Eurasian Union looks like a bad deal, including for
Russia. The union "won't really register on the radar of the global economy,"
said an analyst at the EU's Institute for Security Studies in Paris. Moreover,
one research states that so far EAEU was not able to contribute to economic
growth in Armenia – quite the contrary, it significantly slowed the economic
performance of the country.

### Pivot to Asia

The union is actively seeking to increase trade with East Asia. It commenced
talks for official trade cooperation with ASEAN. Officials of both unions
discussed opportunities for developing cooperation between them. The South
Korean president launched a "Eurasian Initiative", which seeks to connect
transportation, electrical, gas and oil links from Western Europe to East
Asia. The initiative echoes China's long-standing "New Silk Road" project. The
members of the union agreed to step up talks with Vietnam on creating a free
trade zone, to strengthen cooperation with China, including in information
exchange on goods and services, and to set up expert groups to develop
preferential trade regimes with Israel and India.

#### Russia

On 21 May 2014, Russia and China signed a $400 billion gas deal. Starting
2019, Russia plans to provide natural gas to China for the next 30 years.

The European Council on Foreign Relations and analysts suggest the Eurasian
Union includes strategic interests as well as economic interests for its
member states, especially Russia. In order to link both Europe and East Asia,
Russia seeks to develop its eastern regions to increase its access to Asian
markets. Russia's Far East has gained even more importance due to its
proximity to alternative markets since the European Union and United States
imposed sanctions on Russia following the start of the Russo-Ukrainian war.

China's rise as a major trading partner has been cited as a potential reason
for Russia's loss of control over Central Asian economies. The union is seen
as a way to counterbalance China's growing trade in Central Asia and the
European Union's Eastern Partnership.

As the trade bloc seeks to profit from the growing economies of East Asia,
Russia has made steps to develop its eastern territories, Siberia and the
Russian Far East. However, the development of the Russian Far East may face
difficulties due to Russia's traditional orientation towards Europe and the
region's backward infrastructure and underdeveloped economy. In 2012 Russian
President Vladimir Putin called for Russia to "catch the Chinese wind in the
sails of the Russian economy". During the same year, a Ministry for the
Development of the Russian Far East was established and the country hosted a
summit of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum (APEC) in its eastern
city of Vladivostok. The country also began striking deals and undertook
massive efforts to improve infrastructure in its eastern territories. Russia's
pivot to Asia included the important task of creating a Eurasian trade bloc.
The countries seek to increase their competitiveness by sustaining domestic
development and defending their interests in the region. An estimated 76% of
Russia's exports depend on resources extracted (or manufactured) in Siberia.
In order to transport goods from East Asia to Europe, they must be transported
through Siberia by rail. Hence, the region plays an important role in trade.
However, it remains less developed than Russia's western regions and
modernisation plans are ongoing.

In 2013 the Russian government announced it would spend 450 billion roubles
(US$14 billion) for the modernisation of the Trans-Siberian and Baikal-Amur
railways. Russian President Vladimir Putin called the Trans-Siberian railway
the country's "strategically vital transport artery". In July 2013 he stated
"Rail freight traffic to our Far East ports has increased by 55 percent over
the last 5 years and now comes to around 110 million tons a year". Projects to
upgrade stations at the border with Mongolia, China and North Korea were also
undertaken the same year.

In 2016, Putin calls on Eurasian Economic Union, China, India, Pakistan, Iran
and the CIS to join "Greater Eurasian Partnership".

Some experts also see the union as a way to curtail the loss of Russian
influence in Central Asia. Russian politicians have voiced their concerns over
Russia's long southern borders and the challenges it may pose. By creating a
regional trade bloc to keep its neighbours in Central Asia stable, Russia
hopes to find securing its own borders easier.

#### Kazakhstan

Neighbouring Kazakhstan has replicated Russia's attempt to access East Asian
markets. In September 2013, the presidents of China and Kazakhstan signed
commercial deals and launched China's "New Silk Road". On 20 May 2014, both
presidents announced they would link Kazakhstan's railways to the Pacific
Ocean by opening a new terminal in the Chinese port city of Lianyungang. China
also signed agreements to make further investments in Kazakhstan's energy
sector. Both countries announced they would put aside US$1 billion to
modernise an oil refinery in Shymkent and a further US$150 million to open a
new oil and gas plant near Almaty. The president of Kazakhstan also held talks
with the heads of Chinese corporations and agreed to cooperate in the areas of
aircraft production, telecommunication and mining.

## Third-country economic relationships

The Union has signed a first free trade agreement with Vietnam.

Having completed a free trade agreement (FTA) feasibility study for Vietnam in
November 2012 the then Customs Union, which later became the EAEU, decided to
proceed with negotiations. The negotiations over the FTA began in early 2013
and lasted approximately two years – on 29 May 2015 the agreement was signed
by Prime Ministers of all the parties to be later ratified by the parties.
Trade between Vietnam and the Customs Union in 2011 was US$2.24 billion.

Russia's economic development minister stated that the Turkish economic
minister, Nihat Zeybekci, put forward an initiative for closer cooperation
with the Eurasian Economic Union, including the formation of a free trade zone
between the union and Turkey.

As announced by Russian Deputy Prime Minister Arkady Dvorkovich on 9 December
2013, Israel is considering starting free trade negotiations with the Eurasian
Economic Union. The feasibility study was conducted between the two parties
and the decision was made to proceed with free trade negotiations, which are
expected to start before the end of 2016. Experts believe the negotiations
will take around 2 to 3 years to finish.

Russian President Vladimir Putin stated at a July 2014 meeting of ambassadors
and permanent representatives of the Russian Federation that he was ready to
discuss a free trade area between the European Union and the Eurasian Economic
Union.

In February 2015, Egyptian president Abdel Fattah al-Sisi announced his
country would sign a free trade agreement with the Eurasian Union.[_citation
needed_] The preliminary feasibility study has been conducted and the decision
to launch negotiation process is expected to be made before the end of 2016.

There have been discussions on free trade negotiations with over 30 countries,
some of them resulting in the preliminary feasibility studies. Such
feasibility studies have been conducted with India and the Republic of Korea.

In May 2015, the Union gave the initial go-ahead to signing a free trade
agreement with Iran. Described as the EAEU's "key partner in the Middle East"
by Andrey Slepnev, Minister for trade on the Eurasian Economic Commission
board in an expert-level EAEU meeting in Yerevan,[_citation needed_] Viktor
Khristenko furthermore noted that Iran is an important partner for all the
EAEU member states. He stated that "Cooperation between the EAEU and Iran is
an important area of our work in strengthening the economic stability of the
region". In December 2015 a "temporary Agreement" was signed between Iran and
the EAEU, which Commissioner Andrey Slepnev characterized as the "first step
toward the materialization of free trade between Iran and the
Union".[_citation needed_]

One of the key initiatives in the field of free trade and economic cooperation
is the proposal on "linking" the Eurasian economic integration and China's
strategic "Silk Road Economic Belt" project. The relevant communique was
signed by Russia's Vladimir Putin and China's Xi Jinping on 8 March 2015.
While the "linking" mostly is understood as support for infrastructure
investments, there are ongoing negotiations between the EAEU and China on a
"trade and economic agreement" in order to build "an open economic
architecture without a political component, oriented on business and reducing
barriers".

As a result of Russia's invasion of Ukraine, the US and EU placed sanctions
upon Russia and Belarus. On 10 March 2022, Russia suspended exports of wheat,
meslin, rye, barley, and corn to the Eurasian Economic Union to secure the
country's food supplies. The ban was reversed on 1 April 2022, although other
restrictions on the trade of foods were simultaneously introduced. On 29 March
a Kazakh government official stated that Kazakhstan would abide by US and EU
sanctions and would not facilitate any circumvention, despite its membership
of the EAEU. The official explained that Kazakhstan does not wish to be
targeted by secondary sanctions, and instead will be seeking to expand its
cooperation with the EU.

As of 2023, negotiations were also well underway with Indonesia and the United
Arab Emirates. Negotiations with Iran and Egypt were almost finalized. The EEC
was also preparing to revise its current agreement with China. The current,
non-preferential agreement entered into force in October 2019 and does not
provide any reduction in duties.

On 15 December 2023, the EAEU signed a free trade agreement with Iran that
will eliminate customs duties on almost 90% of goods. The agreement serves to
replace a similar temporary agreement that has been in force since 2019.

### Third-country EAEU Agreements

Trade Agreements of the Eurasian Economic Union on the official website in
2024

After 1 January 2015, the members of the EAEU do not have the right to
independently conclude a free trade _in goods_ agreements because they
delegated their powers to the supranational level according to the Treaty on
the Eurasian Economic Union (Article 35).

According to the website of the Eurasian Economic Commission, the EAEU has
signed bilateral (one of the parties is the "Eurasian Economic Union and its
Member States") agreements with

  * Vietnam (signed on 29 May 2015, entered into force on 5 October 2016 and this Free Trade Agreement & Economic Integration Agreement covers trade in goods and trade in services)
  * Iran (the Interim Agreement was signed on 17 May 2018, and came into force on 27 October 2019 and this Free Trade Agreement covers trade in goods.) Full FTA signed on 25 December 2023 and came into force on 15 May 2025.
  * China (signed on 17 May 2018, entered into force on 25 October 2019 and this Agreement is not a free trade agreement at all since it does not provide any reduction in duties, but it creates a legal framework for trade and economic cooperation between the Union as a whole and China and on issues of customs cooperation, technical barriers to trade, sanitary and phytosanitary measures, trade protection measures, issues of electronic commerce, intellectual property, competition and public procurement, as well as sectoral cooperation and the Parties recognize the importance of economic integration in the Asia-Pacific and Eurasia and the importance of conjunction of the Eurasian Economic Union and the Belt and Road Initiative)
  * Serbia (signed on 25 October 2019, and entered into force on 10 July 2021 and this Free Trade Agreement covers trade in goods)
  * Singapore (the EAEU-Singapore Framework Agreement and the EAEU-Singapore Free Trade Agreement were signed on 1 October 2019)

Officially, agreements with Egypt, India, Indonesia, Israel, Mongolia and the
UAE are under development. A potential free trade agreement between Mongolia
and the EAEU is under discussion, but its future remains subject to domestic
political and economic considerations.

### Pre-2015 free trade in goods agreements

The 1994 CIS FTA Agreement signatories (all 12 countries). As of 2023,
multilateral free trade regime under the 1999 Protocol has entered into force
for Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova,
Tajikistan, Uzbekistan and Ukraine while Russia and Turkmenistan refused to
participate. The 2011 Commonwealth of Independent States Free Trade Area among
Russia, Ukraine, Belarus, Uzbekistan, Moldova, Armenia, Kyrgyzstan, Kazakhstan
and Tajikistan

Although the countries of the Eurasian Economic Union have delegated their
powers to conclude free trade _in goods_ agreements to the supranational level
according to the Treaty on the Eurasian Economic Union (Article 35), the
previous agreements with third countries concluded before 1 January 2015
continue to be in force (Article 102). According to the Article 102: "Member
States have the right to unilaterally grant preferences in trade with a third
party on the basis of an international agreement concluded by 1 January 2015
of this Member State with such a third party or an international agreement to
which all Member States are parties." Thus, agreements such as those within
the Commonwealth of Independent States (the terms of the CIS FTA allow member
states to enter into the FTA agreements with other countries, as well as to
join/create custom unions) and bilateral agreements that do not regulate
relations with third countries remain in force for their parties.

The 1994 CIS FTA Agreement, 1999 CIS FTA Protocol (multilateral free trade is
in force among 10 countries) and 2011 CIS FTA Treaty (multilateral free trade
is in force among 9 countries) have signed by all members of the EAEU. The
multilateral free trade regime under the 1999 Protocol is not applied by
Russia at all. As of 2023, the Protocol has entered into force for Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Tajikistan,
Uzbekistan and Ukraine and 1 reservation was made by Azerbaijan on non-
application in relation to Armenia and 2 specific opinions were expressed by
Georgia and Ukraine.

2011 Commonwealth of Independent States Free Trade Area was negotiated before
the establishment of the EEU on 1 January 2015. The CISFTA treaty came into
force at different dates for every state. The treaty came into force in
Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan and Russia at different dates between September
and December 2012. Meanwhile, Kyrgyzstan applied the treaty starting 13
December 2013. In force since 2012, the 2011 multilateral CIS Free Trade Zone
Treaty establishes a free trade area between Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Russia (now all EAEU member states), as well as Ukraine,
Uzbekistan, Moldova and Tajikistan. Russia has suspended the Agreement with
respect to Ukraine from 1 January 2016, following the provisional application
of the DCFTA between the European Union and Ukraine. Ukraine did the same
thing on 2 January with regard to Russia.

Thus, in addition to all previous multilateral agreements, the following
agreements apply on a bilateral basis according to the article 102. Bilateral
free trade agreements with Azerbaijan, Georgia, Turkmenistan, Serbia and
Montenegro as well as "zero tariffs" agreements with Abkhazia and South
Ossetia are in force in Russia. Bilateral free trade agreement with
Turkmenistan is in force in Belarus. Bilateral free trade agreement with
Turkmenistan is in force in Armenia. Bilateral free trade agreement with
Serbia is in force in Kazakhstan.

### Cooperation, Trade in Services and Investment Agreements

Eurasian Economic Union stamp

The members of the EAEU may conclude an agreement on _investment and trade in
services_ without the consent of EAEU supranational bodies, since these powers
have not been transferred to a supranational level, however according to the
Treaty on the Eurasian Economic Union (Article 35), an international treaty of
the EAEU with a third party establishing a free trade regime may include other
provisions related to foreign trade activities (i.e. Cooperation, Trade in
Services and Investment). All Members of the Union retains autonomy (i.e.,
national competence) in matters of concluding agreements on free trade in
services and investments. The process of concluding such agreements with third
countries is carried out independently of the partners in the Union. The only
condition prescribed in the Treaty on the EAEU is the obligation to provide to
the Member States of the EAEU the same concessions, which are granted to the
partner (partners) under that agreement (Article 38 of the Treaty and section
6 of Annex No. 16 to the Treaty).

The 2015 EAEU-Vietnam Free Trade Agreement & Economic Integration Agreement
covers trade in goods and trade in services.

The Armenia–EU Comprehensive and Enhanced Partnership Agreement was signed by
Armenia and all EU member states on 24 November 2017. The World Trade
Organization classifies this agreement as an agreement on trade in services.

Russia has concluded 82 agreements on mutual protection of investments and
investment promotion, including agreements with Cambodia, Iran, Morocco and
the State of Palestine, which were signed after 1 January 2015. 65 agreements
have entered into force.

On 8 June 2023, in Sochi, Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Russia,
Tajikistan and Uzbekistan signed the Commonwealth of Independent States
Agreement on Free Trade in Services, Establishment, Operations and Investment
to partly integrate Uzbekistan and Tajikistan on the common standards of the
WTO (General Agreement on Trade in Services) and the EAEU even without their
membership in the WTO (Uzbekistan) or the EAEU (Uzbekistan and Tajikistan).
Uzbekistan and Tajikistan have not decided to join the EAEU, but bringing
country's legislation to the EAEU common standards can be considered as the
first step.

The Ambassador of the United Arab Emirates in Moscow said that the UAE is
striving for a free trade agreement by the end of 2023 with the EAEU to
include provisions on trade in services and investment.

On 22 August 2024, Belarus and China signed an agreement on trade in services
and investment. Belarus is the first EAEU country with which China has
concluded such an agreement.

### Unilateral preferences for economic assistance

The EAEU has the Common System of Tariff Preferences for approved goods from
29 developing and 48 least-developed countries. As of 5 March 2021, they are
Algeria, Bolivia, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Ghana, Honduras, Egypt, Zimbabwe, Iran,
Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Kenya, Republic of the Congo, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Morocco, the Marshall Islands, Federal
States of Micronesia, Mongolia, Nigeria, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Papua New
Guinea, Tunisia, the Philippines, Sri Lanka, El Salvador, Eswatini on the 1
list and Angola, Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Benin, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Bhutan, Haiti, Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Djibouti, Zambia,
Yemen, Cambodia, Kiribati, Union of the Comoros, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Liberia, Mauritania,
Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, Republic of the Niger,
Palestine(according to the United Nations General Assembly Resolution 43/177),
Rwanda, Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Syrian Arab
Republic, Solomon Islands, Federal Republic of Somalia, Sudan, Sierra Leone,
Tanzania, Timor-Leste, Togolese Republic, Tuvalu, Uganda, Central African
Republic, Chad, Eritrea, Ethiopia, South Sudan on the 2nd list.

The system of tariff preferences is aimed at promoting the economic growth of
countries that objectively need economic assistance from the Union. In 2021, a
decision was published to exclude 75 developing countries and 2 least
developed countries from the lists, but at the same time, the status of the
beneficiary country of the common system of tariff preferences of the EAEU is
preserved for states in need of economic assistance from the EAEU. The first
list of countries was approved in 2009 and did not change dramatically until
2021. As of May 2020, there were 153 countries in it, including Turkey,
Brazil, Argentina, China and South Korea. The list was revised in 2021 so that
there would be no injustice when lower-income countries provide tariff
preferences to high-income countries. A country can obtain for tariff
preferences if its income level is determined by the World Bank as "low-
income" or "lower-middle-income", that is, the gross national income per
capita in such a country is less than $4,045. The import duties applicable to
products eligible for tariff preferences and originating from developing
countries were at the level of 75% of the Most favoured nation duty rates and
from least-developed countries at the level of 0%.

At the same time, the members of the Union themselves are recipients of tariff
preferences. Kyrgyzstan was granted preferences from Canada, the United
Kingdom, the EU, Japan, Norway, Switzerland, Turkey and the United States.
Armenia was granted preferences from Canada, the EU, Japan, Norway,
Switzerland and the United States. Belarus was granted preferences from Japan,
Norway and Switzerland. Kazakhstan was granted preferences from Japan, Norway,
Switzerland and the United States. In 2013, the World Bank announced that
Russia had graduated to a high-income economy based on the results of 2012 but
in 2016 it was reclassified as an upper-middle income economy due to changes
in the exchange rate of the Russian ruble, which is a floating currency. As a
result of the World Bank's designation of a high-income economy, Barack Obama
issued a proclamation: "I have determined that Russia is sufficiently advanced
in economic development and improved in trade competitiveness that it is
appropriate to terminate the designation of Russia as a beneficiary developing
country effective October 3, 2014." U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP)
indicated that Russia formally graduated from the GSP program on 4 October
2014. Thus, Russia does not have these preferences. In 2024, the World Bank
again reclassified Russia as a high-income economy based on 2023 results.

## International cooperation and interaction

International cooperation and interaction with third countries, other
integration associations and international organizations can happen under
legal framework for international cooperation, including the Treaty on the
Eurasian Economic Union, Procedure for the EAEU International Cooperation,
Main Directions of the EAEU International Activities, Regulation on the
Procedure for Admission of New Members to the EAEU and Termination of
Membership in the EAEU, Regulation on the Observer State Status at the EAEU
and Strategic Directions for Developing the Eurasian Economic Integration.

According to the commission's website, over the years memoranda, events and
statements have been adopted with third countries and international
organizations, including the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine, Ministry of
Commerce of the People's Republic of China, United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development (UNCTAD), United Nations Economic Commission for Europe,
Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy of the Republic of Korea, Ministry of
Foreign Trade of the Republic of Ecuador, International Trade Center,
MERCOSUR, and OECD.

The commission's website has published information and news on international
cooperation (documents, memoranda, visits, summits, events, conferences,
negotiations with officials, representatives and ambassadors, etc.) with
dozens states (namely Austria, Angola, Bangladesh, Bolivia, Brazil, Venezuela,
Guatemala, Germany, Greece, India, Indonesia, Jordan, Iran, Spain, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Canada, Kenya, China, Colombia, Cuba, Luxembourg, Mauritius,
Morocco, Mexico, Moldova, Mongolia, Myanmar, Nicaragua, New Zealand, UAE,
Peru, Portugal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, USA, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Tunisia, Uzbekistan, Faroe Islands, Philippines, France, Czechia, Chile,
Ethiopia) and dozens regional associations and international organizations
(Andean Community, ASEAN, Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation, BRICS, African
Union, East African Community, Dialogue on Cooperation in Asia, European
Union, Latin American Economic System (SELA), MERCOSUR, Organization for
Security and Co-operation in Europe, Organization of the Black Sea Economic
Cooperation, Subsystem for economic integration in Central America, CICA, CIS,
Union State of Russia and Belarus, Pacific Alliance, Shanghai Cooperation
Organisation, Economic Community of Central African States (ESCA), ECOSOC,
United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific,
UNCTAD). According to the commission's website, for the purpose of forming
favorable conditions for the development of interaction with the EAEU and as
the first step to institutionalize cooperation, it has become a practice in
the EEC to conclude memoranda of cooperation (third countries, regional
integration associations and international organizations). Broad cooperation
in the format of memoranda of cooperation is established with the governments
of Bangladesh, Jordan, Indonesia, Cambodia, Cuba, Morocco, Moldova, Mongolia,
Peru, Singapore, Thailand, the Faroe Islands and Chile, as well as with the
Andean Community, the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN), the
African Union, the Pacific Alliance, the Latin American Economic System (SELA)
and the Southern Common Market (MERCOSUR). The EEC interacts with the
Government of Greece in the format of a joint declaration.

There are various formats of interaction between third states and the Eurasian
Economic Union. One of the simplest formats is obtaining the observer status
at the Union. The Supreme Eurasian Economic Council, the highest supranational
body of the Eurasian Economic Union, granted observer state status to the
Republic of Moldova, the Republic of Cuba and the Republic of Uzbekistan.

### Foreign affairs

The Eurasian Economic Union mainly uses its arms industry, raw materials, gas
and oil reserves,[_citation needed_] and railways as its key assets for trade
with foreign countries.

Although Russia is the only member of the Eurasian Economic Union under
sanctions from the West, other members of the Eurasian Economic Union have
repeatedly used the bloc as a platform to articulate their opposition to
sanctions and trade wars.

### Economic partners

The Eurasian Economic Union must negotiate as a whole to sign free trade
agreements with other countries. Key players for the Eurasian Economic Union
are the European Union, Turkey, Iran, China and the Korean peninsula. The EAEU
has sought to increase its trade with partners in the Middle East and East
Asia in order to profit from the growing trade between Europe and Asia.

Because of disagreements with the Eurasian Economic Union's largest member,
Russia, the European Union does not officially recognize the Eurasian Economic
Union. Tensions with the European Union in 2014 have led both unions to
pressure post-Soviet states to join their integration unions. Both sides have
accused each other of carving spheres of influence. Members of the union,
especially Russia have tried to diversify their trade by signing economic
agreements with China, Iran and Turkey. Trade with North and South Korea has
also risen.

A rising China has been increasingly interested in Central Asia and the
Eurasian Economic Union. Analysts see the union as a potential way China could
facilitate its investments in the region. Historically, China held close
economic ties with many countries throughout Eurasia. Under the Han Dynasty,
its trade routes extended to the Roman Empire. The Economy of the Han Dynasty
and other subsequent dynasties exchanged numerous goods with countries
throughout Europe and Asia. Both China and the union have stated they would
benefit from recreating trade routes modelled on the historic Silk Road.

Railways transport goods from China to the European Union through Kazakhstan
and Russia. The country has pushed for the construction of more railway lines
to connect Berlin to east China to reduce shipping time. It proposed major
high-speed railway lines going towards Europe via Russia and Kazakhstan and
another through the Middle East via Tajikistan, a potential future member for
the union. China has signed numerous energy deals with Russia and Kazakhstan,
as it tries to move from coal to less pollutant alternatives.

Iran has sought to diversify its economy as well, seeing the EAEU and China as
key economic partners. Relations between Russia and Iran have increased as
both countries are under U.S. sanctions and are seeking new trade partners. in
2014 the two countries signed a historic US$20 billion energy deal. A free
trade agreement between Iran and the Eurasian Economic Union came into force
on 27 October 2019.

Kazakhstan seeks to enhance its ties with Turkey, a key player in the region.
In July 2014, Turkey announced closer economic ties with the EAEU, including a
possible free trade agreement in the near future.

### Armenia and Nagorno-Karabakh

Azerbaijani President Ilham Aliyev, Russian President Dmitry Medvedev and
Armenian President Serzh Sargsyan hold peace talks in Moscow on 2 November
2008.

In September 2013, Armenia announced its intentions of joining the Customs
Union of Belarus, Kazakhstan and Russia. At the time of joining the Union, the
Republic of Armenia already had preferential treatment within the framework of
the CIS as a party to the Free Trade Zone Agreement of 18 October 2011, and
therefore enjoyed significant tariff benefits. According to an IMF
representative in Armenia, Armenia's membership to the Eurasian Economic Union
resulted in about $250 million a year in customs revenue. Armenia also
benefited in the form of secured privileges for 752 products until 2020, which
implies no EAEU tariffs due to Union membership. Joining the Union allowed the
country to get even more tangible economic effects due to the functioning of
the Common Economic Space, the use of common technical regulation, sanitary
and phytosanitary measures, non-tariff regulation. Such results confirm that
for the implementation of full-scale freedom of movement of goods,
liberalization of tariff regulation alone is not enough. The region of
Nagorno-Karabakh, however, is disputed between Armenia and Azerbaijan.
Tensions rose further in the Caucasus region on 30 July 2014 due to clashes
between Armenian and Azerbaijani soldiers.

Experts estimated that with the accession of Armenia, the internationally
unrecognised Nagorno-Karabakh Republic would not be integrated into the
Eurasian Union. Armenia is a permanent political, military and economic ally
of Russia, whereas Azerbaijan holds close ties with Armenia's long-standing
enemy Turkey. The Kazakh President Nursultan Nazarbayev expressed concern in
2013 that no reliable customs border between Armenia and Nagorno-Karabakh
could be drawn. However, Nazarbayev expressed that he holds all the existing
disagreements preventing Armenia's integration into Eurasian Economic Union
are surmountable. The Chairman of the Foreign Policy Committee in the Armenian
Parliament, Artak Zakarian, announced on 14 May 2014 that Armenia will not
build any customs borders, including with the region of Nagorno-Karabakh.

Following the 2023 Azerbaijani offensive in Nagorno-Karabakh, the Nagorno-
Karabakh Republic ceased to exist.

According to Eurasian Economic Commission statistics, Eurasian Economic Union
countries experienced a 1.9% GDP increase between January–June 2018, compared
to the same period in 2017. Armenia had the greatest GDP growth index
throughout the reporting period – 8.3%. The EEU's industrial output increased
by 3.3%, with reprocessing industry increasing by 62.7% and mining increasing
by 27.9%. Again, Armenia had the largest growth in industrial production –
9.6% – despite a 12.7% fall in mining.

### Uzbekistan, Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan

Previously, Tajikistan was on track to become a potential member of the union,
having signed the treaty on the Eurasian Customs Union and the Single Economic
Space. However, due to border disputes between Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan, the
integration process in Tajikistan has stalled. Both countries exchanged fire
in December 2013 and August 2014, which resulted in casualties. Both countries
have since announced they would resolve conflicts and improve border
cooperation. Officials hope to make significant progress by the end of 2015.
In March 2020, Uzbekistan announced that it wished to become a Eurasian Union
observer state.

### International response

Former President of the European Commission José Manuel Barroso stated at the
World Economic Forum that the EU supports the regional integration, including
the Eurasian Union. He also praised Kazakhstan for joining the bloc. He
criticized the post-Soviet space, saying "the integration in the region is not
sufficient". However, he warned that the Russo-Ukrainian War is a major
obstacle to good cooperation between the EU and the Eurasian Union.

Tensions between the EAEU and the European Union (EU) occurred as both have
sought to deepen their ties with several former Soviet republics. The EU has
signed free trade agreements with Ukraine, Moldova and Georgia. However,
separatists in all three countries back closer ties with Russia. Ukraine
planned to sign an EU association agreement in 2013, but abruptly cancelled
the signing under Russian pressure to join the EAEU. This led to mass protests
against Ukraine's president, with the EU supporting a failed political
settlement before president Yanukovych fled to Russia, and Russia then
annexing the Crimean peninsula (following a disputed referendum) and
supporting separatists in Eastern Ukraine. In response, some member states of
the European Union have sought to find alternatives to Russian gas, while
others have voiced their support for the construction of the South Stream
pipeline which circumvents Ukraine. Later the already started construction of
the pipeline, under US sanctions on Russia and pressure on EU, the project was
abandoned. Analysts believe Russia backs the Eurasian Economic Union in order
to limit western influence in the region.

Western analysts generally see the Eurasian Economic Union as a way to reunite
many of the former Soviet republics. For example, _Washington Post_ author
Abigail Hauslohner wrote the treaty was intended "to further bolster
[Russia]'s ties to former Soviet republics." The United States expressed its
opposition to the Eurasian Union, claiming it is "an attempt" to re-establish
a USSR-type union among the former Soviet republics. In December 2012, former
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton claimed "It's not going to be called that
[Soviet Union]. It's going to be called customs union, it will be called the
Eurasian Union and all of that, but let's make no mistake about it. We know
what the goal is and we are trying to figure out effective ways to slow down
or prevent it".

Kazakhstan's president Nursultan Nazarbayev called it "a hard-won achievement"
and "a blessing for our people." Public support in Kazakhstan for the
country's accession to the EAEU stood at 68% in June 2014, with 5.5% opposed.

Thailand, Iran, New Zealand, Tunisia, Turkey, and Vietnam are among the
countries that expressed a desire to conclude trade agreements with the new
Eurasian Economic Union after the treaty was signed. In 2018, the Faroe
Islands signed a new memorandum of understanding with the EEU. The MoU is
designed to boost trade and cooperation between the two sides.

### Existing integration projects

A clickable Euler diagram showing the relationships among various
supranational organisations in the territory of the former Soviet Union

  * v
  * t
  * e

The Eurasian Customs Union has already brought partial economic integration
between the three states, and the Eurasian Economic Union is said to be a
continuation of this customs union. However, the impact or legacy of that
agreement is unclear – trade between the three states actually fell 13% during
the agreement's first year.

A number of other regional organisations also provide the basis for further
integration: the Union State of Russia and Belarus; the Collective Security
Treaty Organisation, consisting of Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Russia and Tajikistan; and the Commonwealth of Independent States comprising
most of the post-Soviet countries.

## Geography

The Eurasian Economic Union is located at the eastern end of Europe, bounded
by the Arctic in the north, the Pacific Ocean to the east and East Asia, the
Middle East and part of Central Asia to the south. It lies between latitudes
39° and 82°N and longitudes 19°E and 169°W. The union extends across much of
northern Eurasia. Its member states cover an area of over 20,000,000 square
kilometers, which is approximately 15% of the world's land surface.

The Eastern European Plain encompasses Belarus and most of European Russia.
The plain is mostly mountain-free and comprises several plateaus. Russia's
northernmost regions are tundra. The Russian Tundra is located on the
coastline with the Arctic and is known for its total darkness in the winter.
Taiga reaches Russia's southern borders in Siberia and accounts for 60% of the
country. Towards the Ural Mountains and in northern Kazakhstan, the climate is
mostly temperate. Southwestern Russia and Kazakhstan are mostly steppe. The
Kazakh steppe covers one-third of Kazakhstan and is the world's largest dry
steppe region. Armenia is mostly mountainous and its climate is continental.
The landlocked country shares no direct border with other members states. It
is located in the southwestern part of Asia, occupying the northeastern part
of the Armenian plateau, and is located between the Caucasus and the Near
East.

A large number of lakes and rivers are found in the Eurasian Economic Union.
Major lakes include Ladoga and Onega, two of the largest lakes in Europe. The
largest and most prominent of the union's bodies of fresh water is Lake
Baikal, the world's deepest, purest, oldest and most capacious fresh water
lake. The Baikal lake alone contains over one-fifth of the world's fresh
surface water. Russia is second only to Brazil in volume of the total
renewable water resources. Of the union's numerous rivers, the Volga is the
most famous, not only because it is the longest in Europe, but also because of
its major role in history. In Siberia the Ob, Yenisey, Lena and Amur are among
the longest rivers in the world.

The Eurasian Economic Union's highest peak is the Khan Tengri in the Tian Shan
mountains, Kazakhstan, 7,010 m above sea level. The lowest point in the
Eurasian Economic Union is the Karagiye Depression in Kazakhstan. Kazakhstan's
Caspian shore includes some of the lowest elevations on Earth. According to a
2005 estimate by the United Nations, forests cover 40% of Belarus. 11,000
lakes and many water streams are found in the country. Russia is known for its
extensive mineral and energy resources, the largest reserves in the world,
making it the world's largest producer of oil and natural gas.

According to estimates, the Eurasian Economic Union's population of 176
million people is mostly urbanized, with Russia and Belarus having over 70% of
their population living in urban areas. In Armenia over 64% of the population
lives in urban areas. Kazakhstan's urban population comprises 54% of the
country's total population.

  * Mount Elbrus – Russia

  * Mountain range – Armenia

  * Lama River – in the Moscow region of Russia

  * Sharyn Canyon – Kazakhstan

  * On the southern shore of Issyk-Kul lake, Issyk-Kul Region – Kyrgyzstan

  * Winter – Belarus

  * A view of Mount Aragats from Aragatsotn – Armenia

  * A view of Mount Mönkh Saridag – Okinsky District, Russia

  * Lake Ayger – Armenia

  * Lake Servech – Belarus

  * Winter in the Altai Krai – Russia

  * Tian Shan mountain range – Kyrgyzstan

## Demographics

The combined population of all member states is 185,332,000 as of 2024.

  * v
  * t
  * e

Largest cities or towns in Eurasian Union  
Russia, Kazakhstan, Belarus, Kyrgyzstan, Armenia  
---  
Rank  |  | Member state | Pop.  | Rank  |  | Member state | Pop.   
1 | Moscow | Russia | 13,149,803 | 11 | Nizhny Novgorod | Russia | 1,204,985   
2 | Saint Petersburg | Russia | 5,597,763 | 12 | Chelyabinsk | Russia | 1,177,058   
3 | Almaty | Kazakhstan | 2,275,541 | 13 | Ufa | Russia | 1,163,304   
4 | Minsk | Belarus | 1,992,862 | 14 | Samara | Russia | 1,158,952   
5 | Novosibirsk | Russia | 1,633,851 | 15 | Bishkek | Kyrgyzstan | 1,145,044   
6 | Yekaterinburg | Russia | 1,536,183 | 16 | Rostov-on-Don | Russia | 1,140,487   
7 | Astana | Kazakhstan | 1,502,102 | 17 | Krasnodar | Russia | 1,138,654   
8 | Kazan | Russia | 1,318,604 | 18 | Omsk | Russia | 1,104,485   
9 | Shymkent | Kazakhstan | 1,246,661 | 19 | Yerevan | Armenia | 1,098,900   
10 | Krasnoyarsk | Russia | 1,205,473 | 20 | Voronezh | Russia | 1,046,425   
  
Countries with population larger than Eurasian Economic Union in 2018

The Eurasian Economic Union has 22 cities with more than 1 million
inhabitants, the largest being Moscow. The most densely populated areas are
the capital cities of member states and European Russia. Siberia is the region
with the least inhabitants. In Russia about 160 different ethnic groups and
indigenous peoples live within the country's borders. Kazakhstan and Belarus
are home to sizable ethnic Russian minorities. Though the member states of the
Eurasian Economic Union's populations are comparatively large, its density is
low because of the enormous size of Russia and Kazakhstan. The Eurasian
Economic Union's average birth rate in 2010 was roughly 12.5 births per 1000
people, higher than the European Union, which has an average of 9.90 births
per 1000 people.