Multinational X-ray research laser facility in Germany

53°35′20″N 9°49′44″E﻿ / ﻿53.589°N 9.829°E﻿ / 53.589; 9.829

All member nations of the European XFEL project are highlighted in dark
purple.

The **European X-Ray Free-Electron Laser Facility** (**European XFEL**) is an
X-ray research laser facility commissioned during 2017. The first laser pulses
were produced in May 2017 and the facility started user operation in September
2017. The international project with twelve participating countries; nine
shareholders at the time of commissioning (Denmark, France, Germany, Hungary,
Poland, Russia, Slovakia, Sweden and Switzerland), later joined by three other
partners (Italy, Spain and the United Kingdom), is located in the German
federal states of Hamburg and Schleswig-Holstein. A free-electron laser
generates high-intensity electromagnetic radiation by accelerating electrons
to relativistic speeds and directing them through special magnetic structures.
The European XFEL is constructed such that the electrons produce X-ray light
in synchronisation, resulting in high-intensity X-ray pulses with the
properties of laser light and at intensities much brighter than those produced
by conventional synchrotron light sources.

## Location

The 3.4-kilometre (2.1 mi) long tunnel for the European XFEL housing the
superconducting linear accelerator and photon beamlines runs 6 to 38 m (20 to
125 ft) underground from the site of the DESY research center in Hamburg to
the town of Schenefeld in Schleswig-Holstein, where the experimental stations,
laboratories and administrative buildings are located.

## Accelerator

Electrons are accelerated to an energy of up to 17.5 GeV by a 2.1 km (1.3 mi)
long linear accelerator with superconducting RF-cavities. The use of
superconducting acceleration elements developed at DESY allows up to 27,000
repetitions per second, significantly more than other X-ray lasers in the U.S.
and Japan can achieve. The electrons are then introduced into the magnetic
fields of special arrays of magnets called undulators, where they follow
slalom like trajectories resulting in the emission of X-rays whose wavelength
is in the range of 0.05 to 4.7 nm.

## X-ray laser

The X-rays are generated by self-amplified spontaneous emission (SASE), where
electrons interact with the radiation that they or their neighbours emit.
Since it is not possible to build mirrors to reflect the X-rays for multiple
passes through the electron beam gain medium, as with light lasers, the X-rays
are generated in a single pass through the beam. The result is spontaneous
emission of X-ray photons which are coherent (in phase) like laser light,
unlike X-rays emitted by ordinary sources like X-ray machines, which are
incoherent. The peak brilliance of the European XFEL is billions of times
higher than that of conventional X-ray light sources, while the average
brilliance is 10,000 times higher. The higher electron energy allows the
production of shorter wavelengths. The duration of the light pulses can be
less than 100 femtoseconds.

## Instruments

There are seven instruments at European XFEL, run by scientists from all over
the world.

### Femtosecond X-ray Experiments (FXE)

The FXE instrument allows ultrafast pump-probe experiments on time scales of
less than 100 femtoseconds The research emphasis of FXE is on the measurement
of ultrafast, often nonlinear chemical or biochemical reactions of samples in
solutions or condensed matter with hard X-ray radiation. The instrument
comprises two independent X-ray emission spectrometers, which can be used at
the same time with a large-area 1 megapixel detector for scattering
examinations. To excite samples, the instrument additionally has an ultra-fast
laser that can be used from ultraviolet (UV) to infrared (IR).

### High Energy Density (HED) and HIBEF UC

The instrument has been developed together with the HIBEF user consortium
(HIBEF UC) a unique platform for experiments in which matter can be
investigated under extreme pressure, temperature or electrical field
conditions using hard X-rays. HED and the HIBEF user consortium have access to
high-energy optical lasers and pulsed magnets. Scientific applications include
the investigation of matter such as that found inside exoplanets, high-density
plasmas and matter under extreme pressures or high magnetic fields. The first
user experiment took place in May 2019. Since then, further devices have been
put into operation and optimised, such as the focussing, the spectrometer, the
monochromators and the sample environments. The HIBEF user consortium has
contributed a second experimental chamber with diamond anvil cells as well as
special laser systems and a laser shock device.

### Single Particles, Clusters, and Biomolecules & Serial Femtosecond
Crystallography (SPB/SFX)

The instrument Single Particles, Clusters, and Biomolecules & Serial
Femtosecond Crystallography (SPB/SFX) can provide data on objects in the
micrometre range up to atomic resolution.

### Soft X-ray port (SXP)

### Spectroscopy and Coherent Scattering (SCS)

SCS is the soft X-rays spectroscopy and scattering instrument of the European
XFEL. The scientific interest of SCS is focused on the exploration of light-
induced transient phenomena in quantum materials as well as in molecules. The
beamline hosts a soft X-rays grating monochromator for monochromatic
operations.

The instrument is equipped with three main end-stations that can be coupled to
different experimental probes:

  * Chemistry chamber (CHEM) equipped with a liquid jet apparatus to study diluted samples, molecules and chemicals.
  * Forward-scattering Fixed-Target (FFT): a solid samples chamber equipped with an electromagnet, optimized for transmission spectroscopies, small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS), coherent diffraction imaging (CDI) and X-ray photon correlation spectroscopy (XPCS).
  * X-ray diffraction (XRD) chamber for solid samples equipped with a six degrees of freedom in-vacuum diffractometer.

The CHEM and XRD chambers can be couple with a high-resolution resonant
inelastic X-ray scattering spectrometer to perform pump and probe RIXS
experiments with a very high energy and temporal resolution.

The FFT and CHEM chambers can be both coupled to a forward scattering DEPMOS
Sensor with Signal Compression (DSSC) detector.

SCS offers a variety of different optical sources to be used as a pump to
induce transient states or photoactivated reactions in the samples. All the
end-stations are equipped with an optical laser in-coupling which allows for
spatial and temporal overlap of the X-rays and optical laser pulses at the
interaction point.

### Small Quantum Systems (SQS)

The SQS instrument is developed to investigate fundamental processes of light-
matter interaction in the soft X-ray wavelength radiation. Typical objects of
investigation are in the range from isolated atoms to large bio-molecules, and
typical methods are variety of spectroscopic techniques. The SQS instrument
provides three experimental stations:

  * Atomic-like Quantum Systems (AQS) for atoms and small molecules
  * Nano-size Quantum Systems (NQS) for clusters and nano-particles
  * Reaction Microscope (SQS-REMI) enabling the complete characterization of the ionization and fragmentation process by analyzing all products created in the interaction of the target with the FEL pulses

Photon energy range between 260 eV and 3000 eV (4.8 nm to 0.4 nm). The
ultrashort FEL pulses of less than 50 fs duration in combination with a
synchronized optical laser allow for capturing ultrafast nuclear dynamics with
very high resolution.

### Materials imaging and dynamics (MID)

The scope of the MID instrument are material science experiments using the
unprecedented coherent properties of the X-ray laser beams of the European
XFEL. The scientific applications reach from condensed matter physics,
studying for example glass formation and magnetism, to soft and biological
material, such as colloids, cells and viruses.

Imaging

Imaging covers a broad range of techniques and scientific fields, from
classical phase-contrast X-ray imaging to coherent X-ray diffraction imaging
(CXDI) and with applications, e.g. in strain imaging inside nanostructured
materials to bio-imaging of whole cells. In many cases the aim is to obtain a
3D representation of the investigated structure. By phase retrieval methods it
is possible to pass from the measured diffraction patterns in reciprocal space
to a real space visualization of the scattering object.

Dynamics

Complex nanoscale dynamics is an ubiquitous phenomenon of fundamental interest
at the forefront of condensed matter science, and comprises a multitude of
processes from visco-elastic flow or dissipation in liquids and glasses to
polymer dynamics, protein folding, crystalline phase transitions, ultrafast
spin transitions, domain wall dynamics, magnetic domain switching and many
more. The extremely brilliant and highly coherent X-ray beams will open up
unseen possibilities to study dynamics in disordered systems down to atomic
length scales, with timescales ranging from femtoseconds to seconds using
techniques such as XPCS.

## Control

The experiments in the facility are controlled via the in-house developed
control system named _Karabo_. It is a distributed SCADA system written in C++
and python.

## Research

The short laser pulses make it possible to measure chemical reactions that are
too rapid to be captured by other methods. The wavelength of the X-ray laser
may be varied from 0.05 to 4.7 nm, enabling measurements at the atomic length
scale.

Today, three photon beamlines with seven instruments can be used. Later this
will be upgraded to five photon beamlines and a total of ten experimental
stations.

The experimental beamlines enable unique scientific experiments using the high
intensity, coherence and time structure of the new source to be conducted in a
variety of disciplines spanning physics, chemistry, materials science, biology
and nanotechnology.

## History

Accelerator modules during construction in 2015

The German Federal Ministry of Education and Research granted permission to
build the facility on 5 June 2007 at a cost of €850 million, under the
provision that it should be financed as a European project. The European XFEL
GmbH that built and operates the facility was founded in 2009. Civil
construction of the facility began on 8 January 2009. Construction of the
tunnels was completed in summer 2012, and all underground construction was
completed the following year. The first beams were accelerated in April 2017,
and the first X-ray beams were produced in May 2017. XFEL was inaugurated in
September 2017. The overall cost for the construction and commissioning of the
facility is as of 2017[update] estimated at €1.22 billion (price levels of
2005).