European patent administrative organisation

European patent law  
---  
European Patent  
Organisation  
  
  * European Patent Convention
  * European Patent Office

  
European Union  
  
  * Biotech directive
  * Supplementary protection certificate
  * Unitary patent
  * Unified Patent Court

  
Eurasian Patent  
Organization  
  
  * Eurasian Patent Convention
  * Eurasian Patent Organization

  
Centralization  
and harmonization  
  
  * Brussels Regime
  * Cross-border injunction
  * London Agreement

  
Historical proposals  
  
  * European Patent Litigation  
Agreement (EPLA)

  
  
  * v
  * t
  * e

  
  
The **European Patent Organisation** (sometimes abbreviated **EPOrg** in order
to distinguish it from the European Patent Office, one of the two organs of
the organisation) is a public international organisation created in 1977 by
its contracting states to grant patents in Europe under the European Patent
Convention (EPC) of 1973. The European Patent Organisation has its seat at
Munich, Germany, and has administrative and financial autonomy. The
organisation is independent from the European Union, and has as member states
all 27 EU member states along with 12 other European states.

The evolution of the Organisation is inherently linked to that of the European
Patent Convention. See European Patent Convention (EPC) for the history of the
European patent system as set up by the EPC, operated by the European Patent
Office (EPO), and supervised by the Administrative Council of the European
Patent Organisation.

## Organs

European Patent Office headquarters in Munich

The European Patent Organisation has two organs: the European Patent Office,
which acts as its executive body, and the Administrative Council, which acts
as its supervisory body as well as, to a limited extent, its legislative body.
The actual legislative power to revise the European Patent Convention lies
with the Contracting States themselves when meeting at a Conference of the
Contracting States.

Besides, the Boards of Appeal, which do not form an independent organ of the
Organisation but are integrated within the European Patent Office, are
assigned the role of an independent judiciary. The European Patent
Organisation is in that sense an international organisation "modelled on a
modern state order and based on the separation of powers principle".

### European Patent Office

The European Patent Office (EPO) examines European patent applications and
grants European patents under the European Patent Convention. Its headquarters
are located at Munich, Germany, with a branch in Rijswijk (near The Hague,
Netherlands), sub-offices in Berlin, Germany, and Vienna, Austria, and a
"liaison bureau" in Brussels, Belgium.

### Administrative Council

The Administrative Council is made up of Representatives and alternate
Representatives of the Contracting States and is responsible for overseeing
the work of the European Patent Office, ratifying the budget and approving the
actions of the President of the Office. The council also amends the Rules of
the EPC and some particular provisions of the Articles of the European Patent
Convention.

As of 2019, the Chairman of the Administrative Council is Josef Kratochv√≠l.

## Legal status

The European Patent Organisation has legal personality, and is represented by
the President of the European Patent Office.

## Member states, extension state, and validation states

There are, as of October 2022, 39 Contracting States to the EPC, also called
member states of the European Patent Organisation: Albania, Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, North
Macedonia, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, and the United Kingdom (see
European Patent Convention article for the dates of entry in force in each
country). That is, all EU member states are also members of the European
Patent Organisation, and, additionally, Albania, Iceland, Liechtenstein,
Monaco, Montenegro, North Macedonia, Norway, San Marino, Serbia, Switzerland,
Turkey, and the United Kingdom are also members of the European Patent
Organisation. The most recent member state to join the EPC was Montenegro
which did so on 1 October 2022.

In addition, there is one "extension state", Bosnia and Herzegovina, which is
not a Contracting State to the EPC but has signed an extension agreement under
which the protection conferred by European patent applications and patents is
extended to the relevant country. Slovenia, Romania, Lithuania, Latvia,
Croatia, North Macedonia, Albania, Serbia, and Montenegro were all extension
states prior to joining the EPC.

Furthermore, there are so-called "validation states", which are not
Contracting States to the EPC but have signed validation agreements that act
similarly to the extension agreements to extend the protection of European
patent applications and European patents. Morocco, Moldova, Tunisia, Cambodia,
and Georgia became validation states on 1 March 2015, 1 November 2015, 1
December 2017, 1 March 2018, and 15 January 2024, respectively.