G11 Members

**Group of Eleven** (**G11**) is a forum, constituted by mostly developing
countries aimed at easing their debt burden (government debt), narrowing the
income gap with rich countries and lifting their people out of poverty.

## History

King Abdullah of Jordan first proposed the group in 2005.

### Objective

The group of eleven is a forum, constituted by mostly developing countries
aimed at easing their debt burden and narrowing the gap with rich countries to
lift, ‘millions out of poverty’. The specific aim is to garner market access
and writing off of the debt burden so that these countries can focus all their
resources on generating growth and stability.

### Creation

The group was created on 20 September 2006. The group comprises mostly lower-
middle-income countries.

### Members

The members consist of Jordan, Croatia, Ecuador, Georgia, El Salvador,
Honduras, Indonesia, Morocco, Pakistan, Paraguay, and Sri Lanka.

The request is made to the G8.

## May 2007 summit

G11 developing countries at their Summit at the Jordanian Dead Sea resort have
agreed to push for cooperation with G8 industrialized nations to ease their
debts and build prosperous economies. These countries and in fact most of the
developing countries require fiscal and monetary space to maintain momentum on
progress to lay the foundation for a diversified and sustainable economic
growth.

The group asked for exploring avenues for enhancing cooperation among member
states to shape their future development needs and strategies as well as
greater cooperation with international partners for market access, enhanced
productive capacities and development of scientific and technological skills
and converting debts to financing aid projects.

G11 countries need targeted assistance and support from the developed
countries to accelerate growth, lift millions from poverty and hasten the
delivery of the fruits of reforms and social development to larger segments of
their population. The G11 group need to enter into political dialogue with the
G8 countries for their support to meet development objectives, encourage
investment and have greater market access.

Outstanding Debt on the developing countries places a great burden on export
earnings and fiscal revenues. Moreover, tariffs imposed by the G8 and other
developed countries on imports are the major hurdles in the way of improving
the living standard of the peoples of the developing and under developed
countries through export led growth.

## G11 proposal on debt

The G11 argues that it is in the interest of the G8 and others to enter into
arrangement with the indebted countries and convert the debts into assistance
for social development projects so that the poor masses could reap the fruits
of development. This would help in reducing the gap between the rich and the
poor, create more job opportunities, alleviate poverty and contribute to
creating an atmosphere of goodwill, fraternity and understanding among the
peoples leading to the cherished objective of prosperity, peace and stability
around the globe.