Coalition of developing countries

The **Group of 77** (**G77**) at the United Nations (UN) is a coalition of
developing countries, designed to promote its members' collective economic
interests and create an enhanced joint negotiating capacity in the United
Nations. The group consists of a diverse set of states with a common South-
South ideology. There were 77 founding members of the organization
headquartered in Geneva, but it has since expanded to 134 member countries.
Iraq holds its chairmanship for 2025, succeeding Uganda.

The group was founded on 15 June 1964, by 77 non-aligned nations in the "Joint
Declaration of the Seventy-Seven Countries" issued at the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD). The first major meeting was in
Algiers in 1967, where the _Charter of Algiers_ was adopted and the basis for
permanent institutional structures was begun under the leadership of Raúl
Prebisch who had previously worked at ECLA. There are _Chapters of the Group
of 77_ in Geneva (UN), Rome (FAO), Vienna (UNIDO), Paris (UNESCO), Nairobi
(UNEP) and the Group of 24 in Washington, D.C. (International Monetary Fund
and World Bank).

## Policies

The group was credited with a common stance against apartheid and for
supporting global disarmament. It has been supportive of the New International
Economic Order.

Regarding environmental matters, the G77's position is that the developed
countries bear historical responsibility for greenhouse gas emissions,
pointing also to the disparity in per capita emissions between the developing
and developed countries. As a result, the G77 often resists binding
commitments to reduce its emissions. The G77 has been subject to criticism for
its lacklustre support, or outright opposition, to pro-environmental
initiatives, which the group considers secondary to economic development and
poverty eradication initiatives. In turn, the G77 has criticized the wealthier
nations for their insufficient attention to poverty eradication, including at
the 1992 United Nations Conference on Environment and Development in Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil.

## Members

Group of 77 countries as of 2013

As of 2023, the group comprises all of the UN member states (along with the UN
observer State of Palestine), excluding the following countries:

  1. Members of the Council of Europe, except for Azerbaijan.
  2. Members of the Commonwealth of Independent States Free Trade Area, except for Tajikistan.
  3. Members of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, except for all its (four) Latin American members.
  4. Two microstates in Oceania: Palau and Tuvalu.

### Current founding members

Source:

  1. Afghanistan
  2. Algeria
  3. Argentina
  4. Bangladesh
  5. Benin
  6. Bolivia
  7. Brazil
  8. Burkina Faso
  9. Burundi
  10. Cambodia
  11. Cameroon
  12. Central African Republic
  13. Chad
  14. Chile
  15. Colombia
  16. Congo
  17. DR Congo
  18. Costa Rica
  19. Dominican Republic
  20. Ecuador
  21. Egypt
  22. El Salvador
  23. Ethiopia
  24. Gabon
  25. Ghana
  26. Guatemala
  27. Guinea
  28. Haiti
  29. Honduras
  30. India
  31. Indonesia
  32. Iran
  33. Iraq
  34. Jamaica
  35. Jordan
  36. Kenya
  37. Kuwait
  38. Laos
  39. Lebanon
  40. Liberia
  41. Libya
  42. Madagascar
  43. Malaysia
  44. Mali
  45. Mauritania
  46. Mexico
  47. Morocco
  48. Myanmar
  49. Nepal
  50. Nicaragua
  51. Niger
  52. Nigeria
  53. Pakistan
  54. Panama
  55. Paraguay
  56. Peru
  57. Philippines
  58. Rwanda
  59. Saudi Arabia
  60. Senegal
  61. Sierra Leone
  62. Somalia
  63. Sri Lanka
  64. Sudan
  65. Syria
  66. Tanzania
  67. Thailand
  68. Togo
  69. Trinidad and Tobago
  70. Tunisia
  71. Uganda
  72. Uruguay
  73. Venezuela
  74. Vietnam
  75. Yemen

### Other current members

  1. Angola
  2. Antigua and Barbuda
  3. Azerbaijan
  4. Bahamas
  5. Bahrain
  6. Barbados
  7. Belize
  8. Bhutan
  9. Botswana
  10. Brunei Darussalam
  11. Cabo Verde
  12. China
  13. Comoros
  14. Côte D'Ivoire
  15. Cuba
  16. Djibouti
  17. Dominica
  18. Equatorial Guinea
  19. Eritrea
  20. Eswatini
  21. Fiji
  22. The Gambia
  23. Grenada
  24. Guinea-Bissau
  25. Guyana
  26. Kiribati
  27. Lesotho
  28. Malawi
  29. Maldives
  30. Marshall Islands
  31. Mauritius
  32. Federated States of Micronesia
  33. Mongolia
  34. Mozambique
  35. Namibia
  36. Nauru
  37. North Korea
  38. Oman
  39. Palestine
  40. Papua New Guinea
  41. Qatar
  42. Saint Kitts and Nevis
  43. Saint Lucia
  44. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
  45. Samoa
  46. São Tomé and Príncipe
  47. Seychelles
  48. Singapore
  49. Solomon Islands
  50. South Africa
  51. South Sudan
  52. Suriname
  53. Tajikistan
  54. Timor-Leste
  55. Tonga
  56. Turkmenistan
  57. United Arab Emirates
  58. Vanuatu
  59. Zambia
  60. Zimbabwe

### Former members

  1. Mexico was a founding member but left the Group after joining the OECD in 1994.
  2. New Zealand signed the original "Joint Declaration of the Developing Countries" in October 1963 but pulled out of the group before the formation of the G77 in 1964 (it joined the OECD in 1973).
  3. South Korea was a founding member but left the Group after joining the OECD in 1996.
  4. Yugoslavia was a founding member; by the late 1990s, it was still listed on the membership list, but it was noted that it "cannot participate in the activities of G77." It was removed from the list in late 2003.[_citation needed_] It had presided over the group from 1985 to 1986. 
     * Bosnia and Herzegovina was the only former Yugoslavian state to be listed as a member on the G77 official website in 2007; it was removed from the member list in February 2020.
  5. Cyprus was a founding member but was no longer listed on the official membership list after it acceded to the European Union in 2004.[_citation needed_] A document from 1975 states that Cyprus is not a member.
  6. South Vietnam was a founding member, while North Vietnam never joined separately.
  7. South Yemen joined separately from founding member North Yemen sometime between 1967 and 1975.
  8. Malta was admitted to the Group in 1976 but was no longer listed on the official membership list after it acceded to the European Union in 2004.
  9. Palau joined the Group in 2002 but withdrew in 2004, having decided that it could best pursue its environmental interests through the Alliance of Small Island States.
  10. Romania was classed as a Latin American country for the purposes of the G77, having joined in 1976. The G77 was divided into geographical regions, and because there was technically no European area, Romania was placed under the umbrella of Latin America. Romania left the G77 following its accession to the European Union.

### China

The Group of 77 lists China as one of its members. The Chinese government
provides consistent political support to the G77 and has made financial
contributions to the Group since 1994, but it does not consider itself to be a
member. As a result, official statements of the G77 are delivered in the name
of **The Group of 77 and China** or **G77+China**.

## Presiding countries

The following is the chain of succession of the chairmanship of the G77:

Presiding countries of the G77 since 1970. Colors show the number of times a country has held the position. Gray = never, Yellow = once, Orange = twice, Red = three times Presiding country  | Year   
---|---  
India | 1970–71   
Peru | 1971–72   
Egypt | 1972–73   
Iran | 1973–74   
Mexico | 1974–75   
Madagascar | 1975–76   
Pakistan | 1976–77   
Jamaica | 1977–78   
Tunisia | 1978–79   
India | 1979–80   
Venezuela | 1980–81   
Algeria | 1981–82   
Bangladesh | 1982–83   
Mexico | 1983–84   
Egypt | 1984–85   
Yugoslavia | 1985–86   
Guatemala | 1987   
Tunisia | 1988   
Malaysia | 1989   
Bolivia | 1990   
Ghana | 1991   
Pakistan | 1992   
Colombia | 1993   
Algeria | 1994   
Philippines | 1995   
Costa Rica | 1996   
Tanzania | 1997   
Indonesia | 1998   
Guyana | 1999   
Nigeria | 2000   
Iran | 2001   
Venezuela | 2002   
Morocco | 2003   
Qatar | 2004   
Jamaica | 2005   
South Africa | 2006   
Pakistan | 2007   
Antigua and Barbuda | 2008   
Sudan | 2009   
Yemen | 2010   
Argentina | 2011   
Algeria | 2012   
Fiji | 2013   
Bolivia | 2014   
South Africa | 2015   
Thailand | 2016   
Ecuador | 2017   
Egypt | 2018   
Palestine | 2019   
Guyana | 2020   
Guinea | 2021   
Pakistan | 2022   
Cuba | 2023   
Uganda | 2024   
Iraq | 2025   
  
## Group of 24

G-24 countries:

Member nations

Observer nations

The Group of 24 (**G-24**) is a chapter of the G-77 that was established in
1971 to coordinate the positions of developing countries on international
monetary and development finance issues and to ensure that their interests
were adequately represented in negotiations on international monetary matters.
Every member of the G-24 is also a member of the G77.