International intergovernmental economic organization

The **Group of Five** (G5) encompasses five nations which have joined together
for an active role in the rapidly evolving international order. Individually
and as a group, the G5 nations work to promote dialogue and understanding
between developing and developed countries. The G5 seek to find common
solutions to global challenges. In the 21st century, the G5 were understood to
be the five largest emerging economies.

The G8 plus the five largest emerging economies has come to be known as G8+5.

## History

The Group of Five is a context-dependent shorthand term for a group of five
nations. The composition of the five and what is encompassed by the term is
construed differently in different time frames. Initially, the term "Group of
Five" or "G5" encompassed the five leading economies of the world, but the use
of the term changed over time. Nowadays, the term tends to describe the next
tier of nations whose economies had expanded so substantially as to be
construed in the same category as the world's eight major industrialized
countries.

### 20th century

The concept of a forum for the world's major industrialized democracies
emerged following the 1973 oil crisis and subsequent global recession. In 1974
the United States created the informal Library Group, an unofficial gathering
of senior financial officials from France, Japan, the United Kingdom, the
United States, and West Germany. These men were called the "Library Group"
because they met informally in the library of the White House in Washington,
D.C.

During the 1970s, the term _Group of Five_ came to be identified the top five
of the world's the leading economies as ranked by per capita GDP. Without the
informal meetings of the G5 finance ministers, there would have been no
subsequent meetings of G-5 leaders. In 1975, French President Valéry Giscard
d'Estaing invited five other heads of government from Italy, Japan, the United
Kingdom, the United States, and West Germany to a six-party economic summit in
Château de Rambouillet. At the time, it was impossible to predict whether this
informal gathering would be meaningful or only a public relations event.

In subsequent years, the group of world leaders expanded to reflect changed
economic and political developments:

  * 1975 — the Group of Six (G6)
  * 1976 — the Group of Seven (G7) was created when Canada joined the G6
  * 1997 — the Group of Eight (G8) was formed when Russia joined the G7

### 21st century

An innovation at the Gleneagles G8 summit in 2005 was an "outreach dialogue."
The United Kingdom was host for the annual summit of G8 leaders; and the UK
invited the leaders of Brazil, China, India, Mexico, and South Africa to
participate. The invitation caused the five countries to negotiate amongst
themselves about presenting common positions.

The success of this collaboration led to the growth of the G5 as an
independent voice. The G5 expresses common interests and viewpoints in the
search of solutions to major global issues.

A number of cohesive elements bind the G5 together in promoting a constructive
dialogue between developed and developing countries.

## Structure and activities

The G5 is an informal group for discussions involving an intentional community
or an epistemic community. The G5 membership is marked by a range of
attributes and factors, including

(a) a _shared set of normative and principled beliefs_ , which provide a
value-based rationale for the social action of community members;

(b) _shared causal beliefs_ , which are derived from their analysis of
practices leading or contributing to a central set of problems in their domain
and which then serve as the basis for elucidating the multiple linkages
between possible policy actions and desired outcomes;

(c) _shared notions of validity_ — that is, intersubjective, internally
defined criteria for weighing and validating knowledge in the domain of their
expertise; and

(d) a _common policy enterprise_ —that is, a set of common practices
associated with a set of problems to which their group competence is directed.

By design, the G5 has avoided establishing an administrative structure like
those of other international organizations, but a coordinator has been
designated to help improve the G5's effectiveness.

## Current leaders

Member  | Image  | Name  | Position(s)   
---|---|---|---  
Brazil |  | Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva | President of Brazil  
China |  | Xi Jinping | General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party  
President of China  
India |  | Narendra Modi | Prime Minister of India  
Mexico |  | Claudia Sheinbaum | President of Mexico  
South Africa |  | Cyril Ramaphosa | President of South Africa