The **Baltic Marine Environment Protection Commission** (**Helsinki
Commission, HELCOM**) is an intergovernmental organization governing the
Convention on the Protection of the Marine Environment of the Baltic Sea Area
(Helsinki Convention). A regional sea convention and a platform for
environmental policy making at the regional level, HELCOM works for the
protection of the marine environment of the Baltic Sea. HELCOM consists of ten
members â€“ the nine Baltic Sea countries Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Germany,
Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Russia and Sweden, plus the European Union.

The Helsinki Convention was signed in 1974 by the Baltic Sea coastal countries
to address the increasing environmental challenges from industrialisation and
other human activities, and that were having a severe impact on the marine
environment. The Helsinki Convention includes the protection of the Baltic Sea
from all sources of pollution from land, air and sea. It also commits the
signatories to take measures to conserve habitats and biological diversity and
to ensure the sustainable use of marine resources. The Helsinki Convention was
updated in 1992 to take into account the geopolitical changes and emerging
environmental challenges in the region. The current version was ratified in
2000.

Contracting parties of HELCOM are:

  * Denmark
  * Estonia
  * European Union
  * Finland
  * Germany
  * Latvia
  * Lithuania
  * Poland
  * Russia
  * Sweden

The HELCOM Secretariat is located in Helsinki, Finland.

## Organization

HELCOM is organized around regular ministerial meetings and meetings of the
lead delegates (HOD - Head of Delegation) where binding decisions and
recommendations are agreed. Preparatory work for these meetings take place
within eight main working groups. Members of the groups are nominated by the
contracting parties and observers from non-governmental organizations, such as
Coalition Clean Baltic.

### HELCOM Working Groups

  * **WG GEAR** HELCOM Working Group on the Implementation of the Ecosystem Approach
  * **WG Maritime** HELCOM Maritime Working Group
  * **WG Sea-based pressure** HELCOM Working Group on Reduction of Pressures from Sea-based Sources
  * **WG Response** HELCOM Response Working Group
  * **WG BioDiv** HELCOM Working Group on Biodiversity, Protection and Restoration State of the Environment and Nature Conservation
  * **WG Fish** HELCOM Working Group on Ecosystem-based Sustainable Fisheries
  * **WG Source to sea** HELCOM Working Group on the Source to Sea Management of Nutrients and Hazardous Substances and Sustainable Agricultural Practices
  * **HELCOM-VASAB MSP WG** Joint HELCOM-VASAB Maritime Spatial Planning Working Group

  
In addition, the working groups have formed a number of expert groups with
nationally nominated members and observers for specialized tasks.