International arbitration institution affiliated with the World Bank

| This article **may rely excessively on sourcestoo closely associated with
the subject**, potentially preventing the article from being verifiable and
neutral. Please help improve it by replacing them with more appropriate
citations to reliable, independent sources. _( January 2015)__(Learn how and
when to remove this message)_  
---|---  
  
The **International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes** (**ICSID**
; French: _Centre international pour le règlement des différends relatifs aux
investissements_) is an international arbitration institution established in
1966 for legal dispute resolution and conciliation between international
investors and States. ICSID is part of and funded by the World Bank Group,
headquartered in Washington, D.C., in the United States. It is an autonomous,
multilateral specialized institution to encourage international flow of
investment and mitigate non-commercial risks by a treaty drafted by the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development's executive directors
and signed by member countries. As of May 2016[update], 153 contracting member
states agreed to enforce and uphold arbitral awards in accordance with the
ICSID Convention.

The centre performs advisory activities and maintains several publications.

## History

In the 1950s and 1960s, the Organisation for European Economic Cooperation
(now the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development) had made
several attempts to create a framework to protect international investments,
but its efforts revealed conflicting views on how to provide compensation for
the expropriation of foreign direct investment.

### Creation

In 1961, Aron Broches, then-General Counsel of the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), developed the idea for a multilateral
agreement on a process for resolving individual investment disputes on a case-
by-case basis as opposed to imposing outcomes based on standards. Broches held
conferences to consult legal experts from all parts of the world, including
Europe, Africa, and Asia, to discuss and compose a preliminary agreement. The
IBRD staff wrote an official draft of the agreement and consulted with legal
representatives of the IBRD's board of directors to finalize the draft and
have it approved.

The board of directors approved the final draft of the agreement, titled
_Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and
Nationals of Other States_ , and the Bank president disseminated the
convention to its member states for signature on 18 March 1965. Twenty states
immediately ratified the convention. The convention established the ICSID
would become officially active on 14 October 1966.[_page needed_][_page
needed_]

### Disputes settled

Since its founding, more than 1,000 cases have been brought to ICSID, all but
14 of which were arbitration cases. The remainder were conciliation cases. As
of 2024, more than 700 cases have been concluded.

The Indonesian government was sued in June 2012 by a London-based mining
company Churchill Mining after the local government revoked the concession
rights held by a local company in which the firm had invested. The government
is countering the Churchill case, claiming that Churchill did not have the
correct type of mining licences.

In October 2012, an ICSID tribunal awarded a judgement of $1.8 billion for
Occidental Petroleum against the government of Ecuador. Additionally, Ecuador
had to pay $589 million in backdated compound interest and half of the costs
of the tribunal, making its total penalty around $2.4 billion. The South
American country annulled a contract with the oil firm on the grounds that it
violated a clause that the company would not sell its rights to another firm
without permission. The tribunal agreed the violation took place but judged
that the annulment was not fair and equitable treatment to the company.

Irish oil firm Tullow Oil took the Ugandan government to court in November
2012 after value-added tax (VAT) was placed on goods and services the firm
purchased for its operations in the country. The Ugandan government responded
that the company had no right to claim tax on such goods prior to commencement
of drilling.

Tobacco major Philip Morris sued Uruguay for alleged breaches to the Uruguay-
Swiss BIT for requiring cigarette packs to display graphic health warnings and
sued Australia under the Australia-Hong Kong BITS for requiring plain
packaging for its cigarettes. The company claimed that the packaging
requirements in both countries violate its investment.

In the context of Nuclear power phase-out in Germany, Swedish Energy company
Vattenfall sought compensation from the German government for the premature
shut-down of nuclear plants.

In July 2024, the International Center for Settlement of Investment Disputes
ordered Morocco to pay $150 million to Corral Petroleum Holdings.

### Performance since creation

Bilateral investment treaties (BITs) proliferated during the first decade of
the 21st century, reaching more than 2,500 by 2007. Many such treaties contain
text that refers present and future investment disputes to ICSID.

As of 30 June 2012, ICSID has registered 390 disputes. ICSID's caseload
consisted of 88% convention arbitration cases, 2% convention conciliation
cases, as well as 9% additional facility arbitration cases, and 1% additional
facility conciliation cases. ICSID's registered cases were distributed across
oil, gas and mining (25%), electricity and other energy (13%), other
industries (12%), transportation industry (11%), construction industry (7%),
financial industry (7%), information industry and communication industry (6%),
water industry, sanitation, and food protection (6%), agriculture, fishing,
and forestry (5%), services and trade (4%), and tourism industry (4%).

As of 27 July 2012[update], 246 of 390 registered arbitration cases were
concluded, as of 30 June 2012[update], ICSID tribunals had resolved nearly two
thirds (62%) of disputes while the remainder (38%) were settled or
discontinued. As of 14 May 2016[update], 362 of 574 (62%) registered
arbitration cases were concluded.

Conciliation commission reports were issued for 67% of the conciliation
proceedings, while 33% of proceedings were discontinued. In 75% of the
conciliation reports, parties failed to reach an agreement, and only 25%
recorded agreement among parties.

As of 2012[update] only two governments, Gabon and Romania, had ever filed an
ICSID case against an investor. States appearing most often as a respondent
were in descending order: Argentina 49, Venezuela 36, Egypt 17, Ecuador 12,
Congo 12, Peru 11 and Ukraine 10 times. Between 2009 and 2012, legal
representation cost between US$1 and 7.6 million. The approximate duration of
a case was 3.6 years.

As of 2019, ICSID's caseload included 2% conciliation cases. The rest were
arbitrations.

## Governance

ICSID is governed by its Administrative Council which meets annually and
elects the centre's secretary-general and deputy secretary-general, approves
rules and regulations, conducts the centre's case proceedings, and approves
the centre's budget and annual report. The council consists of one
representative from each of the centre's contracting member states and is
chaired by the President of the World Bank Group, although the president may
not vote. ICSID's normal operations are carried out by its secretariat, which
comprises 40 employees and is led by the secretary-general of ICSID. The
secretariat provides support to the Administrative Council in conducting the
centre's proceedings. It also manages the centre's Panel of Conciliators and
Panel of Arbitrators. Each contracting member state may appoint four persons
to each panel. In addition to serving as the centre's principal, the
secretary-general is responsible for legally representing ICSID and serving as
the registrar of its proceedings. As of 2012[update], Meg Kinnear serves as
the centre's secretary-general.

## Membership

Contracting States to the ICSID Convention

Signatory States to the ICSID Convention

Former members states, withdrawn

Non Member States

ICSID's 165 member states which have signed the centre's convention include
162 United Nations member states plus Kosovo. Of these member states, 154 are
"contracting member states", that is they have ratified the contract. Former
members are Bolivia and Venezuela, which withdrew in 2012. Ecuador withdrew
from the ICSID Convention in 2009 but rejoined in 2021. All ICSID contracting
member states, whether or not they are parties to a given dispute, are
required by the ICSID Convention to recognize and enforce ICSID arbitral
awards.

### Non-contracting signatories

The following member states have signed the ICSID convention (date in
parentheses), but have not ratified it.

  * Belize (1986)
  * Dominican Republic (2000)
  * Ethiopia (1965)
  * Guinea-Bissau (1991)
  * Namibia (1998)
  * Russia (1992)
  * Thailand (1985)

### Non members

Brazil, India and South Africa are countries with large economies that have
never been ICSID members.

## Activities

ICSID does not conduct arbitration or conciliation proceedings itself, but
offers institutional and procedural support to conciliation commissions,
tribunals, and other committees which conduct such matters. The centre has two
sets of rules that determine how cases will be initiated and conducted, either
under the ICSID Convention, Regulations and Rules or the ICSID Additional
Facility Rules. To be processed in accordance with the ICSID Convention, a
legal dispute has to exist between one of the centre's contracting member
states and a national of another contracting member state. It must also be of
a legal nature and relate directly to an investment. A case can be processed
under the ICSID Additional Facility Rules if one of the parties to the dispute
is either not a contracting member state or a national of a contracting member
state. However, most cases are arbitrated under the ICSID Convention. Recourse
to ICSID conciliation and arbitration is entirely voluntary. However, once the
parties have consented to arbitration under the ICSID Convention, neither
party can unilaterally withdraw its consent.

The ICSID Secretariat may also administer dispute resolution proceedings under
other treaties and regularly assists tribunals or disputing parties in
arbitrations among investors and states under the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law (UNCITRAL)'s arbitration regulations. The centre
provides administrative and technical support for a number of international
dispute resolution proceedings through alternative facilities such as the
Permanent Court of Arbitration in The Hague, Netherlands, the London Court of
International Arbitration, and the International Chamber of Commerce in Paris,
France.

ICSID also conducts advisory activities and research and publishes _Investment
Laws of the World and of Investment Treaties_. Since April 1986, the centre
has published a semi-annual law journal entitled _ICSID Review: Foreign
Investment Law Journal_.

Although ICSID's proceedings generally take place in Washington, D.C., parties
may agree that proceedings be held at one of a number of possible alternative
locations, including the Permanent Court of Arbitration, the Regional
Arbitration Centres of the Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee in
Cairo, in Kuala Lumpur, or in Lagos, the Australian Centre for International
Commercial Arbitration in Melbourne, the Australian Commercial Disputes Centre
in Sydney, the Singapore International Arbitration Centre, the Gulf
Cooperation Council Commercial Arbitration Centre in Bahrain, the German
Institution of Arbitration, the Maxwell Chambers in Singapore, the Hong Kong
International Arbitration Centre, and the Centre for Arbitration and
Conciliation at the Chamber of Commerce of Bogota.

## Criticism

ICSID has sometimes been the target of criticism about grossly inequitable
judgements. Notably, Jeffrey Sachs suggested that the US$5.9 billion judgement
against Pakistan in relation to rights presumed by Tethyan Copper Company
amounted to a "flawed and corrupt investment arbitration process". The
Pakistan Supreme Court had voided a transaction entered into by Balochistan
Development Authority finding in favour of Antofagasta PLC of Chile and
Barrick Gold Corporation of Canada. Nevertheless, others have suggested this
amount is a fair reflection of the fact that a potentially extraordinary asset
(Reko Diq Mine) had effectively been seized seemingly without good reason.