Specialized agency of the United Nations

The **International Labour Organization** (**ILO**) is a United Nations agency
whose mandate is to advance social and economic justice by setting
international labour standards. Founded in October 1919 under the League of
Nations, it is one of the first and oldest specialized agencies of the UN. The
ILO has 187 member states: 186 out of 193 UN member states plus the Cook
Islands. It is headquartered in Geneva, Switzerland, with around 40 field
offices around the world, and employs some 3,381 staff across 107 nations, of
whom 1,698 work in technical cooperation programmes and projects.

The ILO's standards are aimed at ensuring accessible, productive, and
sustainable work worldwide in conditions of freedom, equity, security and
dignity. They are set forth in 189 conventions and treaties, of which eight
are classified as fundamental according to the 1998 Declaration on Fundamental
Principles and Rights at Work; together they protect freedom of association
and the effective recognition of the right to collective bargaining, the
elimination of forced or compulsory labour, the abolition of child labour, and
the elimination of discrimination in respect of employment and occupation. The
ILO is a major contributor to international labour law.

Within the UN system the organization has a unique tripartite structure: all
standards, policies, and programmes require discussion and approval from the
representatives of governments, employers, and workers. This framework is
maintained in the ILO's three main bodies: The International Labour
Conference, which meets annually to formulate international labour standards;
the Governing Body, which serves as the executive council and decides the
agency's policy and budget; and the International Labour Office, the permanent
secretariat that administers the organization and implements activities. The
secretariat is led by the Director-General, Gilbert Houngbo of Togo, who was
elected by the Governing Body in 2022.

In 2019, the organization convened the Global Commission on the Future of
Work, whose report made ten recommendations for governments to meet the
challenges of the 21st century labour environment; these include a universal
labour guarantee, social protection from birth to old age and an entitlement
to lifelong learning. With its focus on international development, it is a
member of the United Nations Development Group, a coalition of UN
organizations aimed at helping meet the Sustainable Development Goals.

Two milestones in the history of the ILO were the Treaty of Versailles in
1919, establishing the International Labour Organization, Article 427. And
secondly, the Declaration of Philadelphia in 1944, reestablishing the ILO
under the United Nations and reaffirming the first principle that "labour is
not a commodity".

## Structure

ILO headquarters in Geneva, Switzerland

The ILO is a specialized agency of the United Nations (UN). As with other UN
specialized agencies (or programmes) working on international development, the
ILO is also a member of the United Nations Development Group.

Unlike other United Nations specialized agencies, the International Labour
Organization (ILO) has a tripartite governing structure that brings together
governments, employers, and workers of 187 member States, to set labour
standards, develop policies and devise programmes promoting decent work for
all women and men. The structure is intended to ensure the views of all three
groups are reflected in ILO labour standards, policies, and programmes, though
governments have twice as many representatives as the other two groups.

### Governing body

The Governing Body is the executive body of the International Labour
Organization. It meets three times a year, in March, June and November. It
takes decisions on ILO policy, decides the agenda of the International Labour
Conference, adopts the draft Programme and Budget of the Organization for
submission to the Conference, elects the Director-General, requests
information from the member states concerning labour matters, appoints
commissions of inquiry and supervises the work of the International Labour
Office.

The Governing Body is composed of 56 titular members (28 governments, 14
employers and 14 workers) and 66 deputy members (28 governments, 19 employers
and 19 workers).

Ten of the titular government seats are permanently held by States of chief
industrial importance: Brazil, China, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan,
the Russian Federation, the United Kingdom and the United States. The other
Government members are elected by the Conference every three years (the last
elections were held in June 2021). The Employer and Worker members are elected
in their individual capacity.

### Director-General

On 25 March 2022 Gilbert Fossoun Houngbo was elected Director-General of ILO.
On 1 October 2022 he succeeded Guy Ryder, who was elected by the ILO Governing
Body in October 2012, and re-elected for a second five-year-term in November
2016. He is the organization's first African Director-General. In 2024, a
group of African countries that play a crucial role visited the International
Labour Office, such as Morocco, where they held talks with the Minister of
Economic Integration, Small Business, Employment, and Skills Development,
Younes Sekouri. The list of the Directors-General of ILO since its
establishment in 1919 is as follows:

Name  | Country  | Term   
---|---|---  
Albert Thomas |  France | 1919–1932   
Harold Butler |  United Kingdom | 1932–1938   
John G. Winant |  United States | 1939–1941   
Edward J. Phelan |  Ireland | 1941–1948   
David A. Morse |  United States | 1948–1970   
Clarence Wilfred Jenks |  United Kingdom | 1970–1973   
Francis Blanchard |  France | 1974–1989   
Michel Hansenne |  Belgium | 1989–1999   
Juan Somavía |  Chile | 1999–2012   
Guy Ryder |  United Kingdom | 2012–2022   
Gilbert Houngbo |  Togo | 2022–present   
  
### Membership

International Labour Organization flag

The ILO has 187 state members. 186 of the 193 member states of the United
Nations plus the Cook Islands are members of the ILO. The UN member states
which are not members of the ILO are Andorra, Bhutan, Liechtenstein,
Micronesia, Monaco, Nauru, and North Korea.

The ILO constitution permits any member of the UN to become a member of the
ILO. To gain membership, a nation must inform the director-general that it
accepts all the obligations of the ILO constitution. Other, non-UN states can
be admitted by a two-thirds vote of all delegates, including a two-thirds vote
of government delegates, at any ILO General Conference. The Cook Islands, a
non-UN state, joined in June 2015.

Countries that had been members of the ILO under the League of Nations
remained members when the organization's new constitution came into effect in
1946.

## Objectives

The Declaration of Philadelphia (10 May 1944) restated the traditional
objectives of the International Labour Organization and then branched out in
two new directions: the centrality of human rights to social policy, and the
need for international economic planning. With the end of the world war in
sight, it sought to adapt the guiding principles of the ILO "to the new
realities and to the new aspirations aroused by the hopes for a better world."
It was adopted at the 26th Conference of the ILO in Philadelphia, United
States of America.

In 1946, when the ILO's constitution was being revised by the General
Conference convened in Montreal, the Declaration of Philadelphia was annexed
to the constitution and forms an integral part of it by Article 1. Most of the
demands of the declaration were a result of a partnership of American and
Western European labor unions and the ILO secretariat.

"Labour is not a commodity" is the principle expressed in the preamble to the
International Labour Organization's founding documents. It expresses the view
that people should not be treated like inanimate commodities, capital, another
mere factor of production, or resources. Instead, people who work for a living
should be treated as human beings and accorded dignity and respect. Paul
O'Higgins attributes the phrase to John Kells Ingram, who used it in 1880
during a meeting in Dublin of the British Trades Union Congress.

## History

### Origins

It is the first organization for the UN.While the ILO was established as an
agency of the League of Nations following World War I, its founders had made
great strides in social thought and action before 1919. The core members all
knew one another from earlier private professional and ideological networks,
in which they exchanged knowledge, experiences, and ideas on social policy.
Pre-war "epistemic communities", such as the International Association for
Labour Legislation (IALL), founded in 1900, and political networks, such as
the socialist Second International, were a decisive factor in the
institutionalization of international labour politics.

In the post-World War I euphoria, the idea of a "makeable society" was an
important catalyst behind the social engineering of the ILO architects. As a
new discipline, international labour law became a useful instrument for
putting social reforms into practice. The utopian ideals of the founding
members—social justice and the right to decent work—were changed by diplomatic
and political compromises made at the Paris Peace Conference of 1919, showing
the ILO's balance between idealism and pragmatism.

Over the course of the First World War, the international labour movement
proposed a comprehensive programme of protection for the working classes,
conceived as compensation for labour's support during the war.[_clarification
needed_] Post-war reconstruction and the protection of labour unions occupied
the attention of many nations during and immediately after World War I. In
Great Britain, the Whitley Commission, a subcommittee of the Reconstruction
Commission, recommended in its July 1918 Final Report that "industrial
councils" be established throughout the world. The British Labour Party had
issued its own reconstruction programme in the document titled _Labour and the
New Social Order_. In February 1918, the third Inter-Allied Labour and
Socialist Conference (representing delegates from Great Britain, France,
Belgium and Italy) issued its report, advocating an international labour
rights body, an end to secret diplomacy, and other goals. And in December
1918, the American Federation of Labor (AFL) issued its own distinctively
apolitical report, which called for the achievement of numerous incremental
improvements via the collective bargaining process.

#### IFTU Bern Conference

As the war drew to a close, two competing visions for the post-war world
emerged. The first was offered by the International Federation of Trade Unions
(IFTU), which called for a meeting in Bern, Switzerland, in July 1919. The
Bern meeting would consider both the future of the IFTU and the various
proposals which had been made in the previous few years. The IFTU also
proposed including delegates from the Central Powers as equals. Samuel
Gompers, president of the AFL, boycotted the meeting, wanting the Central
Powers delegates in a subservient role as an admission of guilt for their
countries' role in bringing about war. Instead, Gompers favoured a meeting in
Paris which would consider President Woodrow Wilson's Fourteen Points only as
a platform. Despite the American boycott, the Bern meeting went ahead as
scheduled. In its final report, the Bern Conference demanded an end to wage
labour and the establishment of socialism. If these ends could not be
immediately achieved, then an international body attached to the League of
Nations should enact and enforce legislation to protect workers and trade
unions.

#### Commission on International Labour Legislation

Meanwhile, the Paris Peace Conference sought to dampen public support for
communism. Subsequently, the Allied Powers agreed that clauses should be
inserted into the emerging peace treaty protecting labour unions and workers'
rights, and that an international labour body be established to help guide
international labour relations in the future. The advisory Commission on
International Labour Legislation was established by the Peace Conference to
draft these proposals. The Commission met for the first time on 1 February
1919, and Gompers was elected as the chairman.

Samuel Gompers (right) with Albert Thomas, 1918

Two competing proposals for an international body emerged during the
Commission's meetings. The British proposed establishing an international
parliament to enact labour laws which each member of the League would be
required to implement. Each nation would have two delegates to the parliament,
one each from labour and management. An international labour office would
collect statistics on labour issues and enforce the new international laws.
Philosophically opposed to the concept of an international parliament and
convinced that international standards would lower the few protections
achieved in the United States, Gompers proposed that the international labour
body be authorized only to make recommendations and that enforcement be left
up to the League of Nations. Despite vigorous opposition from the British, the
American proposal was adopted.

Gompers also set the agenda for the draft charter protecting workers' rights.
The Americans made 10 proposals. Three were adopted without change: That
labour should not be treated as a commodity; that all workers had the right to
a wage sufficient to live on; and that women should receive equal pay for
equal work. A proposal protecting the freedom of speech, press, assembly, and
association was amended to include only freedom of association. A proposed ban
on the international shipment of goods made by children under the age of 16
was amended to ban goods made by children under the age of 14. A proposal to
require an eight-hour work day was amended to require the eight-hour work day
_or_ the 40-hour work week (an exception was made for countries where
productivity was low). Four other American proposals were rejected. Meanwhile,
international delegates proposed three additional clauses, which were adopted:
One or more days for weekly rest; equality of laws for foreign workers; and
regular and frequent inspection of factory conditions.

The Commission issued its final report on 4 March 1919, and the Peace
Conference adopted it without amendment on 11 April. The report became Part
XIII of the Treaty of Versailles.

### Interwar period

The first annual International Labour Conference (ILC) began on 29 October
1919 at the Pan American Union Building in Washington, D.C. and adopted the
first six International Labour Conventions, which dealt with hours of work in
industry, unemployment, maternity protection, night work for women, minimum
age, and night work for young persons in industry. The prominent French
socialist Albert Thomas became its first director-general.

Despite open disappointment and sharp critique, the revived International
Federation of Trade Unions (IFTU) quickly adapted itself to this mechanism.
The IFTU increasingly oriented its international activities around the lobby
work of the ILO.

At the time of establishment, the U.S. government was not a member of ILO, as
the US Senate rejected the covenant of the League of Nations, and the United
States could not join any of its agencies. Following the election of Franklin
Delano Roosevelt to the U.S. presidency, the new administration made renewed
efforts to join the ILO without league membership. On 19 June 1934, the U.S.
Congress passed a joint resolution authorizing the president to join ILO
without joining the League of Nations as a whole. On 22 June 1934, the ILO
adopted a resolution inviting the U.S. government to join the organization. On
20 August 1934, the U.S. government responded positively and took its seat at
the ILO.

### Wartime and the United Nations

During the Second World War, when Switzerland was surrounded by German troops,
ILO director John G. Winant made the decision to leave Geneva. In August 1940,
the government of Canada officially invited the ILO to be housed at McGill
University in Montreal. Forty staff members were transferred to the temporary
offices and continued to work from McGill until 1948.

The ILO became the first specialized agency of the United Nations system after
the demise of the League in 1946. Its constitution, as amended, includes the
Declaration of Philadelphia (1944) on the aims and purposes of the
organization.

### Cold War era

R. Rao, the Deputy Director General of ILO with Wilopo, the then-Indonesian
labor minister, 15 March 1950

Beginning in the late 1950s the organization was under pressure to make
provisions for the potential membership of ex-colonies which had become
independent; in the Director General's report of 1963 the needs of the
potential new members were first recognized. The tensions produced by these
changes in the world environment negatively affected the established politics
within the organization and they were the precursor to the eventual problems
of the organization with the USA.

In July 1970, the United States withdrew 50% of its financial support to the
ILO following the appointment of an assistant director-general from the Soviet
Union. This appointment (by the ILO's British director-general, C. Wilfred
Jenks) drew particular criticism from AFL–CIO president George Meany and from
New Jersey Assemblyman John E. Rooney. However, the funds were eventually
paid.

Ratifications of 1976 Tripartite Consultation Convention

On 12 June 1975, the ILO voted to grant the Palestine Liberation Organization
observer status at its meetings. Representatives of the United States and
Israel walked out of the meeting. The U.S. House of Representatives
subsequently decided to withhold funds. The United States gave notice of full
withdrawal on 6 November 1975, stating that the organization had become
politicized. The United States also suggested that representation from
communist countries was not truly "tripartite"—including government, workers,
and employers—because of the structure of these economies. The withdrawal
became effective on 1 November 1977.

The United States returned to the organization in 1980 after extracting some
concession from the organization. It was partly responsible for the ILO's
shift away from a human rights approach and towards support for the Washington
Consensus. Economist Guy Standing wrote "the ILO quietly ceased to be an
international body attempting to redress structural inequality and became one
promoting employment equity".

In 1981, the government of Poland declared martial law. It interrupted the
activities of Solidarność detained many of its leaders and members. The ILO
Committee on Freedom of Association filed a complaint against Poland at the
1982 International Labour Conference. A Commission of Inquiry established to
investigate found Poland had violated ILO Conventions No. 87 on freedom of
association and No. 98 on trade union rights, which the country had ratified
in 1957. The ILO and many other countries and organizations put pressure on
the Polish government, which finally gave legal status to Solidarność in 1989.
During that same year, there was a roundtable discussion between the
government and Solidarnoc which agreed on terms of relegalization of the
organization under ILO principles. The government also agreed to hold the
first free elections in Poland since the Second World War.

## Offices

### ILO headquarters

Centre William Rappard, seat of the ILO between 1926 and 1974, now hosting the
WTO

The ILO is headquartered in Geneva, Switzerland. In its first months of
existence in 1919, it offices were located in London, only to move to Geneva
in the summer 1920. The first seat in Geneva was on the Pregny hill in the
_Ariana_ estate, in the building that used to host the Thudicum boarding
school and currently the headquarters of the International Committee of the
Red Cross. As the office grew, the Office relocated to a purpose-built
headquarters by the shores of lake Leman, designed by Georges Épitaux and
inaugurated in 1926 (currently the seat of the World Trade Organization).
During the Second World War the Office was temporarily relocated to McGill
University in Montreal, Canada.

The current seat of the ILO's headquarters is located on the Pregny hill, not
far from its initial seat. The building, a biconcave rectangular block
designed by Eugène Beaudoin, Pier Luigi Nervi and Alberto Camenzind, was
purpose-built between 1969–1974 in a severe rationalist style and, at the time
of construction, constituted the largest administrative building in
Switzerland.

### Regional offices

  * Regional Office for Africa, in Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire
  * Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, in Bangkok, Thailand
  * Regional Office for Europe and Central Asia, in Geneva, Switzerland
  * Regional Office for Latin America and the Caribbean, in Lima, Peru
  * Regional Office for the Arab States, in Beirut, Lebanon

### Sub-regional offices

Called "Decent Work Technical Support Teams (DWT)", they provide technical
support to the work of a number of countries under their area of competence.

ILO office in Santiago, Chile

  * DWT for North Africa, in Cairo, Egypt
  * DWT for West Africa, in Dakar, Senegal
  * DWT for Eastern and Southern Africa, in Pretoria, South Africa
  * DWT for Central Africa, in Yaoundé, Cameroon
  * DWT for the Arab States, in Beirut, Lebanon
  * DWT for South Asia, in New Delhi, India
  * DWT for East and South-East Asia and the Pacific, in Bangkok, Thailand
  * DWT for Central and Eastern Europe, in Budapest, Hungary
  * DWT for Eastern Europe and Central Asia, in Moscow, Russia
  * DWT for the Andean Countries, in Lima, Peru
  * DWT for the Caribbean Countries, in Port of Spain, Trinidad and Tobago
  * DWT for Central American Countries, in San José, Costa Rica
  * DWT for Countries of the South Cone of Latin America, in Santiago, Chile

### Country and liaison offices

  * In Africa: Abidjan, Abuja, Addis Ababa, Algiers, Antananarivo, Cairo, Dakar, Dar es Salaam, Harare, Kinshasa, Lusaka, Pretoria, Yaoundé
  * In the Arab States: Beirut, Doha, Jerusalem
  * In Asia and the Pacific: Bangkok, Beijing, Colombo, Dhaka, Hanoi, Islamabad, Jakarta, Kabul, Kathmandu, Manila, New Delhi, Suva, Tokyo, Yangon
  * In Europe and Central Asia: Ankara, Berlin, Brussels, Budapest, Lisbon, Madrid, Moscow, Paris, Rome
  * In the Americas: Brasília, Buenos Aires, Mexico City, New York, Lima, Port-of-Spain, San José, Santiago, Washington, D.C.

## Activities

### Conventions

Through July 2018, the ILO had adopted 189 conventions. If these conventions
are ratified by enough governments, they come in force. However, ILO
conventions are considered international labour standards regardless of
ratification. When a convention comes into force, it creates a legal
obligation for ratifying nations to apply its provisions.

Every year the International Labour Conference's Committee on the Application
of Standards examines a number of alleged breaches of international labour
standards. Governments are required to submit reports detailing their
compliance with the obligations of the conventions they have ratified.
Conventions that have not been ratified by member states have the same legal
force as recommendations.

In 1998, the 86th International Labour Conference adopted the _Declaration on
Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work_. This declaration contains four
fundamental policies:

  * The right of workers to associate freely and bargain collectively
  * The end of forced and compulsory labour
  * The end of child labour
  * The end of unfair discrimination among workers

The ILO asserts that its members have an obligation to work towards fully
respecting these principles, embodied in relevant ILO conventions. The ILO
conventions that embody the fundamental principles have now been ratified by
most member states.

Protocols are always linked to Conventions, even though they are international
treaties they do not exist on their own. As with Conventions, Protocols can be
ratified.

Recommendations do not have the binding force of conventions and are not
subject to ratification. Recommendations may be adopted at the same time as
conventions to supplement the latter with additional or more detailed
provisions. In other cases recommendations may be adopted separately and may
address issues separate from particular conventions.

### International Labour Conference

Once a year, the ILO organizes the International Labour Conference (ILC) in
Geneva to set the broad policies of the ILO, including conventions and
recommendations. Also known as the "international parliament of labour", the
conference makes decisions about the ILO's general policy, work programme and
budget and also elects the Governing Body.

The first conference took place in 1919: see Interwar period below.

Each member state is represented by a delegation composed of two government
delegates, an employer delegate, a worker delegate. All of them have
individual voting rights and all votes are equal, regardless of the population
of the delegate's member State. The employer and worker delegates are normally
chosen in agreement with the most representative national organizations of
employers and workers. Usually, the workers and employers' delegates
coordinate their voting. All delegates have the same rights and are not
required to vote in blocs.

Delegates can attend with advisers and substitute delegates, and all have the
same rights: they can express themselves freely and vote as they wish. This
diversity of viewpoints does not prevent decisions from being adopted by very
large majorities or unanimously.[_citation needed_]

Heads of State and prime ministers also participate in the Conference.
International organizations, both governmental and others, also attend but as
observers.

The 109th session of the International Labour Conference was delayed from 2020
to May 2021 and was held online because of the COVID-19 pandemic. The first
meeting was on 20 May 2021 in Geneva for the election of its officers. Further
sittings were held in June, November and December. The 110th session took
place from 27 May to 11 June 2022. The 111th session of the International
Labour Conference took place in June 2023.

### Global forum meetings

The ILO organizes regular international tripartite gatherings and global
dialogue fora on issues of interest to specific sectors of business and
employment, for example on supply chain safety in the packing of containers
for global shipping (2011), and on employment conditions in early childhood
education (2012).

### Labour statistics

The ILO is a major provider of labour statistics. Labour statistics are an
important tool for its member states to monitor their progress toward
improving labour standards. As part of their statistical work, ILO maintains
several databases. This database covers 11 major data series for over 200
countries. In addition, ILO publishes a number of compilations of labour
statistics, such as the Key Indicators of Labour Markets (KILM). KILM covers
20 main indicators on labour participation rates, employment, unemployment,
educational attainment, labour cost, and economic performance. Many of these
indicators have been prepared by other organizations. For example, the
Division of International Labour Comparisons of the U.S. Bureau of Labor
Statistics prepares the hourly compensation in manufacturing indicator.

The U.S. Department of Labor also publishes a yearly report containing a _List
of Goods Produced by Child Labor or Forced Labor_ issued by the Bureau of
International Labor Affairs. The December 2014 updated edition of the report
listed a total of 74 countries and 136 goods.

The ILO is the custodian agency for nine of the 17 indicators of Sustainable
Development Goal 8 (SDG 8). This goal is about "decent work and economic
growth". For example, ILO is the agency for Indicator 8.b.1 of Target 8.b. The
wording of this target is: "By 2020, develop and operationalize a global
strategy for youth employment and implement the Global Jobs Pact of the
International Labour Organization". As such, ILO is in charge of the data
gathering for the progress of the Global Youth Empowerment Strategy.

### Training and teaching units

The International Training Centre of the International Labour Organization
(ITCILO) is based in Turin, Italy. Together with the University of Turin
Department of Law, the ITC offers training for ILO officers and secretariat
members, as well as offering educational programmes. The ITC offers more than
450 training and educational programmes and projects every year for some
11,000 people around the world.

For instance, the ITCILO offers a Master of Laws programme in management of
development, which aims specialize professionals in the field of cooperation
and development.

## Responses to issues

### Child labour

Parties to ILO's 1973 Minimum Age Convention, and the minimum ages they have
designated: purple, 14 years; green, 15 years; blue, 16 yearsThese young boys
are among the millions of children in child labour worldwide. They work at a
brickyard in Antsirabe, Madagascar.

Child labour is often defined as work that deprives children of their
childhood, potential, dignity, and is harmful to their physical and mental
development. _Child labour_ refers to work that is mentally, physically,
socially or morally dangerous and harmful to children. Further, it can involve
interfering with their schooling by depriving them of the opportunity to
attend school, obliging them to leave school prematurely, or requiring them to
attempt to combine school attendance with excessively long and heavy work.

The ILO's International Programme on the Elimination of Child Labour (IPEC)
was created in 1992 with the overall goal of the progressive elimination of
child labour, which was to be achieved through strengthening the capacity of
countries to deal with the problem and promoting a worldwide movement to
combat child labour. The IPEC currently has operations in 88 countries, with
an annual expenditure on technical cooperation projects that reached over
US$61 million in 2008. It is the largest programme of its kind globally and
the biggest single operational programme of the ILO.

The number and range of the IPEC's partners have expanded over the years and
now include employers' and workers' organizations, other international and
government agencies, private businesses, community-based organizations, NGOs,
the media, parliamentarians, the judiciary, universities, religious groups and
children and their families.

The IPEC's work to eliminate child labour is an important facet of the ILO's
Decent Work Agenda. Child labour prevents children from acquiring the skills
and education they need for a better future.

The ILO also hosts a Global Conference on the Elimination of Child Labour
every four years. The most recent conference was held in Durban, South Africa
from 15 to 20 May 2022.

The ILO has established the World Day Against Child Labour on June 12 as an
annual event starting in 2002 to raise awareness and prompt action to tackle
child labour worldwide. Coinciding with the Sustainable Development Goals, the
event particularly targets the eradication of its worst forms, like slavery
and the use of child soldiers, by 2025. The ILO distinguishes between
detrimental child labour, which hinders children's development and education,
and acceptable work that supports their growth and learning.

In 2023, the World Day's theme, 'Social Justice for All. End Child Labour!',
calls for reinvigorated global efforts towards achieving social justice and
underscores the critical need for the universal ratification and enforcement
of ILO Conventions No. 138 and No. 182 to protect all children from child
labour.

#### Exceptions in indigenous communities

Because of different cultural views involving labour, the ILO developed a
series of culturally sensitive mandates, including convention Nos. 169, 107,
138, and 182, to protect indigenous culture, traditions, and identities.
Convention Nos. 138 and 182 lead in the fight against child labour, while Nos.
107 and 169 promote the rights of indigenous and tribal peoples and protect
their right to define their own developmental priorities.

In many indigenous communities,[_example needed_] parents believe that
children learn important life lessons through the act of work and through the
participation in daily life. Working is seen as a learning process preparing
children of the future tasks they will eventually have to do as an adult. It
is a belief that the family's and child well-being and survival is a shared
responsibility between members of the whole family. They also see work as an
intrinsic part of their child's developmental process. While these attitudes
toward child work remain, many children and parents from indigenous
communities still highly value education.

### Forced labour

Krychów forced labour camp 1940 (Krowie Bagno)

The ILO has considered the fight against forced labour to be one of its main
priorities. During the interwar years, the issue was mainly considered a
colonial phenomenon, and the ILO's concern was to establish minimum standards
protecting the inhabitants of colonies from the worst abuses committed by
economic interests. After 1945, the goal became to set a uniform and universal
standard, determined by the higher awareness gained during World War II of
politically and economically motivated systems of forced labour, but debates
were hampered by the Cold War and by exemptions claimed by colonial powers.
Since the 1960s, declarations of labour standards as a component of human
rights have been weakened by government of postcolonial countries claiming a
need to exercise extraordinary powers over labour in their role as emergency
regimes promoting rapid economic development.

Ratifications of the ILO's 1930 Forced Labour Convention, with non-ratifiers
shown in red

In June 1998, the International Labour Conference adopted a Declaration on
Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work and its follow-up that obligates
member states to respect, promote and realize freedom of association and the
right to collective bargaining, the elimination of all forms of forced or
compulsory labour, the effective abolition of child labour, and the
elimination of discrimination in respect of employment and occupation.

Ratifications of the ILO's 1957 Abolition of Forced Labour Convention, with
non-ratifiers shown in red

In November 2001, following the publication of the InFocus Programme's first
global report on forced labour, the ILO's governing body created a special
action programme to combat forced labour (SAP-FL), as part of broader efforts
to promote the 1998 Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work
and its follow-up. The SAP-FL was created in November 2001 "to tackle the
elimination of all forms of forced or compulsory labour, one of its foremost
concerns, through both technical assistance and promotional means." SAP-FL has
developed indicators of forced labour practices and published survey reports
on forced labour.

In 2013, the SAP-FL was integrated into the ILO's _Fundamental Principles and
Rights at Work Branch_ (FUNDAMENTALS) bringing together the fight against
forced and child labour and working in the context of Alliance 8.7.

One major tool to fight forced labour was the adoption of the _ILO Forced
Labour Protocol_ by the _International Labour Conference in 2014_. It was
ratified for the second time in 2015 and on 9 November 2016 it entered into
force. The new protocol brings the existing ILO Convention 29 on Forced
Labour, adopted in 1930, into the modern era to address practices such as
human trafficking. The accompanying Recommendation 203 provides technical
guidance on its implementation.

In 2015, the ILO launched a global campaign to end modern slavery, in
partnership with the International Organization of Employers (IOE) and the
International Trade Union Confederation (ITUC). The _50 for Freedom Campaign_
aims to mobilize public support and encourage countries to ratify the ILO's
_Forced Labour Protocol_.

## Role of Civil Society Organizations in the International Labour Conference

Civil society organizations (CSOs) play a supportive and increasingly
recognized role in the work of the **International Labour Organization (ILO)**
, particularly in relation to the annual **International Labour Conference
(ILC)** —the ILO’s highest decision-making body. Through participation in the
ILC and other ILO-led initiatives, CSOs contribute to the advancement of labor
rights and the promotion of social justice on a global scale.

The ILO encourages engagement with CSOs as part of its tripartite approach to
labor governance, which includes representatives from governments, employers,
and workers. Civil society actors bring additional perspectives, often
representing marginalized groups, informal workers, or specific thematic
concerns (e.g., gender equity, forced labor, or child labor).

### Opportunities for Participation

CSOs can engage with the ILO and its annual Conference through several
mechanisms:

  * Accreditation – CSOs may apply for accreditation to attend the International Labour Conference as observers or participants in side events. Accreditation follows formal procedures established by the ILO and is typically granted to international NGOs or networks with relevant expertise in labor standards and rights.

  * Policy Submissions and Reports– Accredited organizations may submit written reports, proposals, and observations relevant to the agenda of the Conference. These contributions inform the deliberations on labor rights, occupational safety, decent work, and social protection.

  * Partnership and Collaboration – Beyond the Conference, the ILO maintains ongoing collaboration with CSOs to promote better working conditions, inclusive labor policies, and the implementation of international labor standards. CSOs may partner with the ILO in research, advocacy, technical cooperation, and monitoring initiatives.

More information on the ILO’s engagement with civil society is available at:
https://www.ilo.org/partnering-development/civil-society-ilo-partnership

### Minimum wage law

To protect the right of labours for fixing minimum wage, ILO has created
Minimum Wage-Fixing Machinery Convention, 1928, Minimum Wage Fixing Machinery
(Agriculture) Convention, 1951 and Minimum Wage Fixing Convention, 1970 as
minimum wage law.

### Commercialized sex

From the moment its creation in the 1919 Treaty of Versailles, the ILO has
been concerned with the controversial issue of commercial sex. Prior to the
creation of the ILO and League of Nations, the issue of sex work had been
exclusively under the jurisdiction of the state, now, the ILO and League of
Nations believed the issue transcended borders and within their jurisdiction.
In the early twentieth, commercialized sex was considered both immoral and
criminal activity. Initially, the ILO strongly believed prostitution was
linked to vulnerable single working women emigrating to other nations without
being under the paternal supervision of a man. After the widespread
destruction caused by World War I, the ILO saw prostitution as spreading
contagion requiring regulation. Under the leadership of the French socialist
Albert Thomas, the ILO created a medical division whose primary focus was on
male sailors whose lives were viewed as "nomadic" and "promiscuous", which
made these men susceptible to infection of STD's. After the conclusion of the
Genoa maritime conference in 1920, the ILO proclaimed itself as the critical
leader of the prevention and treatment of STD's in sailors. In the interwar
years, the ILO also sought to protect female workers in dangers trades, but
delegates to ILO Conferences did not consider the sex trade to be "work",
which was conceived of as industrial labor. The ILO believed that if women
worked industrial jobs, this would be a deterrent from them living immoral
lives. In order to make these industrial jobs more attractive, the ILO
promoted better wages and safer working conditions, both intended to prevent
women from falling victim to the temptation of the sex trades.

Following the creation of the United Nations, the ILO took a back seat to the
newly formed organization on the issue of commercialized sex. The UN
Commission on the Status of Women called for abolishing both sex trafficking
and prostitution. In the 1950s, the UN Economic and Social Council and the
International Police Organization sought to end any activity that resembled
slavery, classifying sex trafficking and prostitution as criminal rather than
labor issues.

Beginning in 1976, the ILO and other organizations began to examine the
working and living conditions of rural women in developing countries. One
example the ILO investigated was the go-go bars and the growing phenomenon of
_hired wives_ in Thailand, which both thrived because the development of U.S.
military bases in the region. In the late 1970s, the ILO established the
_Programme on Rural Women_ , which investigated the involvement of young
masseuses in the sex trade in Bangkok. It was critical because it was the
first time in the history of the ILO or any of its branches that prostitution
was described as a form of labor. In the decades that followed, the increase
in sex tourism and the exploding AIDS epidemic strengthened ILO interest in
the commercial sex trade.

### HIV/AIDS

The International Labour Organization (ILO) is the lead UN-agency on HIV
workplace policies and programmes and private sector mobilization. ILOAIDS is
the branch of the ILO dedicated to this issue.

The ILO has been involved with the HIV response since 1998, attempting to
prevent potentially devastating impact on labour and productivity and that it
says can be an enormous burden for working people, their families and
communities. In June 2001, the ILO's governing body adopted a pioneering code
of practice on HIV/AIDS and the world of work, which was launched during a
special session of the UN General Assembly.

The same year, ILO became a cosponsor of the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS).

In 2010, the 99th International Labour Conference adopted the ILO's
recommendation concerning HIV and AIDS and the world of work, 2010 (No. 200),
the first international labour standard on HIV and AIDS. The recommendation
lays out a comprehensive set of principles to protect the rights of HIV-
positive workers and their families, while scaling up prevention in the
workplace. Working under the theme of _Preventing HIV, Protecting Human Rights
at Work_ , ILOAIDS undertakes a range of policy advisory, research and
technical support functions in the area of HIV and AIDS and the world of work.
The ILO also works on promoting social protection as a means of reducing
vulnerability to HIV and mitigating its impact on those living with or
affected by HIV.

ILOAIDS ran a "Getting to Zero" campaign to arrive at zero new infections,
zero AIDS-related deaths and zero-discrimination by 2015.[_needs update_]
Building on this campaign, ILOAIDS is executing a programme of voluntary and
confidential counselling and testing at work, known as VCT@WORK.

### Migrant workers

As the word "migrant" suggests, migrant workers refer to those who moves from
one country to another to do their job. For the rights of migrant workers, the
first ILC adopted a recommendation on equality and coordination, and the ILO
has adopted conventions, including Migrant Workers (Supplementary Provisions)
Convention, 1975 and United Nations Convention on the Protection of the Rights
of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families in 1990.

### Domestic workers

Domestic workers are those who perform a variety of tasks for and in other
peoples' homes. For example, they may cook, clean the house, and look after
children. Yet they are often the ones with the least consideration, excluded
from labour and social protection. This is mainly due to the fact that women
have traditionally carried out the tasks without pay. For the rights and
decent work of domestic workers including migrant domestic workers, ILO has
adopted the Convention on Domestic Workers on 16 June 2011.

### Environmental sustainability

The ILO has been on working on integrating environmental sustainability into
its activities (or _greening_ its activities) and the broader discourse since
the 1970s. For example, some of ILO's reports in 1972 to 1975 have
investigated linkages between occupational safety and health, economic
development and environmental protection. In the 2000s ILO began to promote a
"socially just transition to green jobs". The organisation defined green jobs
as "decent jobs that contribute to preserving and restoring the environment".

Since 2017, the concept of _just transition_ has been firmly embedded within
the ILO’s position. For example its _Centenary Declaration for the Future of
Work_ in 2019 stated that: "[...] the ILO must direct its efforts to: (i)
ensuring a just transition to a future of work that contributes to sustainable
development in its economic, social and environmental dimensions". A _just
transition_ focuses on the connection between energy transition and equitable
approaches to decarbonization that support broader development goals.

The ILO has also looked at the transition to a green economy, and the impact
thereof on employment. It came to the conclusion a shift to a greener economy
could create 24 million new jobs globally by 2030, if the right policies are
put in place. Also, if a transition to a green economy were not to take place,
72 million full-time jobs may be lost by 2030 due to heat stress, and
temperature increases will lead to shorter available work hours, particularly
in agriculture.

## Awards

In 1969, the ILO received the Nobel Peace Prize for improving fraternity and
peace among nations, pursuing decent work and justice for workers, and
providing technical assistance to other developing nations.