Intergovernmental organization

| This article **containsan advertisement.**. Please help improve it by
removing promotional language and inappropriate external links, and by adding
encyclopedic text written from a neutral point of view. _( July 2020)__(Learn
how and when to remove this message)_  
---|---  
  
The **International Development Law Organization** (**IDLO**) is an
intergovernmental organization dedicated to the promotion of the rule of law.

With a joint focus on the promotion of rule of law and development, it works
to empower people and communities to claim their rights, and provides
governments with the know-how to realize them. It supports emerging economies
and middle-income countries to strengthen their legal capacity and rule of law
framework for sustainable development and economic opportunity. It is the only
intergovernmental organization with an exclusive mandate to promote the rule
of law and has experience working in dozens of countries around the world.

IDLO is headquartered in Rome, Italy and has a branch office in The Hague and
is one of a number of entities that are United Nations General Assembly
observers.

IDLO has operated in dozens of sovereign states, focusing on institution-
building and legal empowerment. Its alumni network includes more than 20,000
legal professionals in 175 countries and 46 independent alumni associations.

IDLO has signed MoUs with United Nations agencies, governments, universities,
and other entities. Major financial contributions to IDLO have come from the
Australian Agency for International Development, Gates Foundation, Center for
International Forestry Research, European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development, European Union, Ford Foundation, Deutsche Gesellschaft für
Internationale Zusammenarbeit, International Fund for Agricultural
Development, Institute of Medicine, Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development,
OPEC Fund for International Development, United Nations Development Programme,
and UNICEF as well as numerous countries, namely Canada, China, Denmark,
France, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom, and
the United States.[_citation needed_]

Jan Beagle is the current Director-General of IDLO.

## History

IDLO began in 1983 as a non-governmental organization (then called
International Development Law Institute) founded by three legal advisors to
cooperation agencies in Egypt: L. Michael Hager (USA), William T. Loris (USA)
and Gilles Blanchi (France), with the Board presided by Dr Ibrahim Shihata
(founder of the OPEC Fund for International Development and Senior Vice-
President and General Counsel of the World Bank from 1983 to 1998). The Board
also included, among others, Professor René David. The Governments of the
United States and Italy provided the start-up seed money and the Headquarter
establishment agreement was signed in Rome in 1988. The Institute changed to
an intergovernmental organization in 1991 after its first Assembly of Member
States in 1990. After the Fall of the Berlin Wall, increased training and
assistance was provided in the field of legal and judicial reform in
developing and transition countries. In the second half of the 90s, greater
attention was also given to sustainable development and the civil society as
well as to countries emerging from conflicts if not genocides (e.g. Cambodia,
Rwanda). In 2002, the Institute was renamed International Development Law
Organisation. In 2001, IDLO was granted Permanent Observer Status at the
United Nations. In 2014, IDLO opened a branch office in The Hague.

## Governance

### Member States

As an intergovernmental organization, membership to the organization is made
up of signatories to the Establishment Agreement of IDLO. The thirty-seven
Parties to IDLO's Establishment Agreement are:

International Development Law Organization Map

  * Afghanistan
  * Australia
  * Austria
  * Bulgaria
  * Burkina Faso
  * China [Member of Audit and Finance Committee]
  * Ecuador
  * Egypt [Member of Standing Committee]
  * El Salvador
  * France
  * Honduras [Member of Standing Committee]
  * Italy [Vice President ex officio] [Member of Audit and Finance Committee]
  * Jordan
  * Kenya [Member of Audit and Finance Committee]
  * Kuwait [Member of Standing Committee and Chair of Audit and Finance Committee]
  * Liberia
  * Mali
  * Mauritania
  * Mongolia
  * Montenegro
  * Mozambique [Vice President]
  * Netherlands
  * Niger
  * OFID
  * Pakistan [Member of Audit and Finance Committee]
  * Paraguay
  * Peru [Member of Audit and Finance Committee]
  * Philippines [Member of Standing Committee]
  * Qatar
  * Romania
  * Senegal
  * Sudan
  * Sweden
  * Tunisia
  * Turkey [Member of Audit and Finance Committee]
  * Uganda
  * United States [President] [Member of Audit and Finance Committee]
  * Vietnam

### Governance Structure

#### Assembly of Parties

Member Party states form the Assembly of Parties, IDLO's highest decision-
making body. Kuwait currently sits as President of the Assembly of parties
while the US has won the vice-president post. The role of the Assembly is to
determine the IDLO's policies and oversee the work of the Director-General.

#### Director-General

Jan Beagle is the current Director-General of IDLO. She was first elected by
Member Parties on 13 November 2019 and formally assumed office on 1 January
2020 for a four-year term. On 13 November 2023, she was re-elected for a
second four-year term beginning in January 2024.

#### International Advisory Council

IDLO's International Advisory Council is composed of:

  * Abdel-Latif Al-Hamad: Chairman and CEO, Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development
  * Abdou Diouf: Former President of the Republic of Senegal
  * Willy Mutunga: Former Chief Justice of Kenya
  * Thomas Pickering: Former United States Ambassador and Under Secretary of State
  * Mary Robinson: Former UN High Commissioner for Human Rights
  * Albie Sachs: Former Justice, Constitutional Court of South Africa
  * Muhammad Yunus: Nobel Peace Laureate, Chairman of Yunus Centre and Founder of Grameen Bank

#### Senior Management

  * Karen Johnson: General Counsel
  * Romualdo Mavedzenge: Acting Director of Programmes
  * Haroun Atallah: Director of Finance and Support Services
  * Ilaria Bottigliero: Director of Policy, Research and Learning
  * Mark Cassayre: Permanent Observer to the United Nations (Geneva)
  * Henk-Jan Brinkman: Permanent Observer to the United Nations (New York)
  * Liliana De Marco: Director of External Relations and Partnerships
  * Cornelia Moussa: Director of Human Resources and Office Services

## Work

IDLO has worked in dozens of countries around the world, with the belief that
justice means ensuring fair outcomes in concrete, local terms.

### Somalia

IDLO has been working in Somalia for the last thirty years, providing training
to Somali legal professionals and technical assistance to the judiciary.
Somali Prime Minister, Dr. Abdiweli Mohamed Ali has called IDLO "a premiere
institution that is supporting Somalia on its journey to peace and stability."

In recent years, IDLO has worked on supporting the development of a Somali
constitution and in the integration of customary justice. In 2011 IDLO created
an assessment of traditional and customary justice, arguing that linking
customary and traditional justice in a bottom up approach would be most
effective.

Financed by the Italian government, IDLO worked with local experts on the
country's provisional Constitution, holding consultative sessions with
Mogadishu residents, refugees, and the Somali diaspora.

Towards the adoption of the Constitution, IDLO helped produce a comparative
analysis of the new draft Constitution, the Constitution of 1960 and the
Transitional Federal Charter of 2004 and supported the Constitutional Affairs
and Reconciliation Ministry in hosting a conference on fundamental rights and
transitional justice.

Following the adoption of the constitution by the National Constitution
Assembly on 1 August 2012 IDLO drafted a report on providing analysis and
suggestions for Justice and Security development under the new constitutional
order. The report provides a description of steps to be taken during the
implementation phase of the constitution, including the establishment of
institutions, development and revision of legislative frameworks, and capacity
building. It also sketches out dispute resolution mechanisms of the three
legal systems in Somalia: xeer, Shari’ah, and the statutory judiciary.

Comparing the draft constitution to those from 53 of the 56 member states of
the Organization of the Islamic Cooperation, as well as the constitutions of
Italy and the United States of America, IDLO found that it contained 36 of the
45 fundamental rights - placing it in the top five of the countries surveyed.
The organization also stated that the Somali draft constitution contained 15
more than the Constitution of the United States of America.

### Afghanistan

IDLO has been active in Afghanistan since 2002, stating their intent has been
to restore rule of law in the country and develop a new idea of justice, while
respecting the principles of Islam. Primarily Afghan staff have been used to
train legal professionals in the country.

Following a survey taken by the IDLO in 2013, which found that women made up
just over 8 percent of the country's judges, 6 percent of prosecutors and less
than one fifth of lawyers, IDLO's Director General Irene Khan called for
greater participation of women in Afghanistan's justice sector.

#### Women's Rights

Whilst the Constitution of Afghanistan offers protection to women, domestic
and sexual violence are common and considered a family matter, dealt through
informal justice systems composed of male elders. In June 2009, IDLO launched
Afghanistan's first Violence against Women Unit, with support from the office
of the Attorney General of Afghanistan. IDLO reports that in 2010 the unit
handled more than 300 cases.

In December 2010 The U.S. Department of State's Bureau of International
Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs (INL) contributed $12.1 million to
expand and improve legal aid services to the poor and disempowered, increase
public awareness of legal issues, rights and services, and improve the
investigation and prosecution of crimes against women and girls.

On 11 April 2013 INL announced it would provide IDLO a further $59 million for
programmes in Afghanistan: $47 million to fund IDLO implement training
programmes for the Afghan justice sector – the Justice Training Transition
Program (JTTP) – and another $12 million for a separate IDLO program to
provide support and training for prosecution of crimes against women.

#### Allegations of Lack of Oversight

In January 2014 the Special Inspector General for Afghanistan Reconstruction
(SIGAR) released a report highlighting it believed there to be a lack of
oversight requirements in INL's 2013 contract with IDLO in relation to JTTP .
SIGAR had previously warned of a lack of monitoring in an ‘alert-letter’ to
the State Department sent to the State Department on July 22, 2013. The letter
also accused IDLO of refusing to provide SIGAR with information regarding its
budget, organizational structure and financial relationship with the US
government.

In response to SIGAR's 2013 statement, State Department deputy spokeswoman
Marie Harf said that there were no allegations or evidence of fraud, waste or
mismanagement in the program and that oversight was provided through daily
contact on the ground.[_citation needed_] In a letter responding to SIGAR's
claims, INL highlighted mechanisms of accountability and stated their
confidence in the IDLO program.

In a statement posted on their website IDLO called their monitoring and
evaluation mechanisms ‘robust and extensive’. IDLO also refuted SIGAR's
statement that it had refused to provide information writing that they had met
with SIGAR staff in April and May 2013.

### South Sudan

IDLO provided the newly established country of South Sudan with technical
legal assistance; training the judiciary in both the fundamentals of common
law and, during the process of transition away from a Shari’ah based legal
system, in ‘legal’ English.

With funding from the European Union in 2014, IDLO scaled up their work in
South Sudan, delivering a series of context-specific training courses to 150
newly appointed judges and judicial support staff.

IDLO also stated it was providing technical assistance in drafting a permanent
Constitution for South Sudan.

### Kenya

Working with constitutional scholars Zachary Elkins and Tom Ginsberg, IDLO
sponsored a group of constitutional scholars from universities in America to
review drafts of the Kenyan constitution and provide feedback to the Kenyan
Parliament.

In 2013, USAID partnered with IDLO to assist the Government of Kenya develop
the comprehensive laws and policies required under the new Constitution,
assisting the Kenyan Parliament in reviewing, analysing and passing 55 laws,
including 16 required by the Constitution. Investigators in the project used
data and analyzed from over 3000 constitutions in the world to share with
Kenya's Commission for the Implementation of the Constitution (CIC) an
analysis of the constitutional implementation process. IDLO also implemented
projects to strengthen the capacity of the judiciary and engage the public in
the process. IDLO has also stated that they are working with the government of
Kenya to advance gender equality across the country and enact gender
provisions contained in the Constitution.

An independent report found that its work in Kenya had provided support and
services were delivered to fulfil identified needs COE and ensured the
delivery trainings to educate Kenyans on the proposed Constitution before it
was put to a national referendum. Despite some challenges, the report notes,
IDLO consultants produced and delivered high quality technical reports and
services which eventually contributed to the final version of the Constitution
of KenyaRolene Guilland (17 November 2009). Supporting the Committee of
Experts on cCnstitutional Review (PDF) (Report). Archived from the original
(PDF) on 6 May 2015. Retrieved 25 January 2011..

A permanent IDLO regional office was set up in Kenya in 2011.

### Women and Girls

In a speech at the Graduate Institute of International and Development Studies
in Geneva, Director-General Irene Khan highlighted the importance of law in
empowering women:

> "A core principle of the rule of law is that we are all equal - equally
> protected by the law and equally accountable to it."

The organization's website states that across all of its programs, IDLO works
to empower women. In February 2013 IDLO released a report on women's access to
justice, with a focus on improving customary justice for women.

### Customary Justice

IDLO has a number of times, including at the UN, emphasized the importance of
working with informal or customary justice systems and has released three
edited volumes on customary justice.