International research organization in Austria

| **This article has multiple issues.** Please help **improve it** or discuss these issues on the **talk page**. _(Learn how and when to remove these messages)_ | | This article **needs additional citations forverification**. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.  
_Find sources:_ "International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis" – news
**·** newspapers **·** books **·** scholar **·** JSTOR _( December
2022)__(Learn how and when to remove this message)_  
---|---  
| This article **containspromotional content**. Please help improve it by
removing promotional language and inappropriate external links, and by adding
encyclopedic text written from a neutral point of view. _( August
2020)__(Learn how and when to remove this message)_  
---|---  
  
_(Learn how and when to remove this message)_  
  
The **International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis** (**IIASA**) is an
independent International research institute located in Laxenburg, near Vienna
in Austria, founded as an East-West scientific cooperation initiative during
the Cold War. Through its research programs and initiatives, the institute
conducts policy-oriented interdisciplinary research into issues too large or
complex to be solved by a single country or academic discipline. These include
climate change, energy security, population aging, and sustainable
development. The results of IIASA research and the expertise of its
researchers are made available to policymakers worldwide to help them make
informed and evidence-based policies.

## Organization

Nearly 600 researchers from 60 countries currently work with the institute.
IIASA's international and interdisciplinary network includes staff, alumni,
member communities, collaborators, diplomatic partners, and visiting fellows.

Hans Joachim "John" Schellnhuber is the current IIASA Director General and
Karen R. Lips serves as the institute's Deputy Director General. Past
directors have included Howard Raiffa, a professor at Harvard Business School
and Harvard Kennedy School, Roger Levien, former vice president for Strategy
at Xerox, Leen Hordijk, former Director at the Institute for Environment and
Sustainability, Joint Research Centre, European Commission, Ispra, Italy, and
Detlof von Winterfeldt, professor at the University of Southern California.

IIASA is a non-governmental institution funded by scientific organizations in
its member countries, which include Austria, China, Egypt, Finland, Germany,
India, Iran, Israel, Japan, Korea, Norway, Russia, Slovakia, Sweden, Ukraine,
the United Kingdom, the United States, and Vietnam. In 2022, IIASA increased
its membership footprint through the Sub-Saharan Africa Regional Member
Organization (SSARMO), as part of a regional approach to participation in
IIASA research and capacity building activities. SSARMO includes 18 African
countries (Botswana, Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya,
Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, Nigeria, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, South
Africa, Tanzania, Uganda, Zambia, and Zimbabwe) who are participating in the
Science Granting Councils Initiative (SGCI) in sub-Saharan Africa. Funding for
the institute also comes from contracts, grants, and donations from
governments, international organizations, academia, business, and individuals.
Its research is independent and is not constrained by political or national
self-interest of member countries.

## History

IIASA was established by a charter signed on 4 October 1972 by representatives
of the Soviet Union, the United States, and ten other countries from the
Eastern and Western blocks at The Royal Society in London. It was the
culmination of six years’ effort driven forward by both the US President
Lyndon Johnson and the USSR Premier Alexei Kosygin. For IIASA, it was the
beginning of a project to use scientific cooperation to build bridges across
the Cold War divide and to confront growing global problems on a truly
international scale. The first scientist arrived at IIASA in June 1973.

IIASA built international multidisciplinary teams to confront innumerable
global challenges both long-standing and emerging. For example, a study on
water pollution carried out in the 1980s by a team of IIASA chemists,
biologists, and economists still forms the basis of modern water policy design
in Japan, USA, and the former USSR.

IIASA's approach of bringing together different nationalities and disciplines
to work toward common goals has now been widely imitated, for example, in the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and the International Geosphere-
Biosphere Programme.

Instead of closing in the 1990s upon the end of the Cold War, the institute
broadened its mandate from bridging East and West to a general global focus.
Today, IIASA brings together a wide range of scientific skills to provide
science-based insights into critical policy issues in international and
national debates on global change.

## Current research

The IIASA mission is to provide scientific guidance to policymakers by finding
solutions to global problems through applied systems analysis in order to
improve human well-being and protect the environment. The institute is at the
forefront of promoting science diplomacy and fostering debates about how
science can help build trust between nations and support foreign policies.

The Vienna Statement on Science Diplomacy, a document created by IIASA,
advocating for a renewed global commitment to international scientific
cooperation to help countries build stronger relations for the benefit of all
of humanity, has been endorsed by close to two hundred eminent personalities
from the academic and policymaking community, including H.E. Ban Ki-moon, 8th
UN Secretary-General and Co-chair of the Ban Ki-moon Centre for Global
Citizens, and H.E. Tarja Halonen, 11th President of the Republic of Finland
and member of the UN Secretary-General’s High-Level Advisory Board on
Mediation.

In 2021, IIASA embarked on a new strategy to develop and apply systems science
to support transformations to sustainability. Building on almost fifty years
experience in systems science, the IIASA Strategy 2021-2030 positions the
institute to be the primary destination for integrated systems solutions and
policy insights to current, emerging, and novel global sustainability
challenges, threats, and opportunities. The strategy combines three integrated
pillars—research, impact enhancement, and implementation—to deliver on this
vision.

To support the IIASA strategy, the institute also implemented a re-designed
research structure to enhance the integration of scientific work across the
institute and so strengthen IIASA as it navigates the global system of
systems. The new structure has two tiers consisting of six research programs
which are in turn split into research groups, with the option to activate or
deactivate groups as priorities change: Advancing Systems Analysis,
Biodiversity and Natural Resources, Economic Frontiers, Energy, Climate, and
Environment, Population and Just Societies, and Strategic Initiatives.

## Major projects

Ten IIASA scientists were among the authors of the IPCC Fourth Assessment
Report (the work of the IPCC, including the contributions of many scientists,
was recognized by the joint award of the 2007 Nobel Peace Prize). IIASA
researchers are major contributors to Working Groups II and III of the IPCC
Fifth Assessment Report and are invited contributors to Working Groups I, II
and III of the IPCC Sixth Assessment Report.

The Greenhouse Gases – Air Pollution Interactions and Synergies (GAINS) model
was launched in 2006 as an extension to the RAINS model which is used to
assess cost-effective response strategies for combating air pollution, such as
fine particles and ground-level ozone. The Chinese Government officially
adopted GAINS in 2019 to strengthen air quality management in the country.

The IIASA led Arctic Futures Initiative (AFI), in collaboration with the
Finnish Ministry of Foreign Affairs culminated in a report that considered how
different Arctic actors define and address issues around the human dimension,
governance, international cooperation, environmental protection, pollution,
climate change, security, safety, economy, tourism, infrastructure, and
science and education.

IIASA is a core member of the Food and Land Use (FOLU) Coalition that brings
together stakeholders from academia and the public and private sectors to
identify and advance solutions that deliver food security, healthy and
affordable diets, halt biodiversity loss, restore and protect ecosystem
services, and mitigate climate change and environmental pollution.

A partnership with the Global Environment Facility and the UN Industrial
Development Organization, the Integrated Solutions for Water, Energy, and Land
(ISWEL) project, developed tools and capacities for the cohesive management of
water, energy, and land resources in the Indus and Zambezi basins.

Together with the Sustainable Development Solutions Network (SDSN), IIASA
initiated the Food Agriculture Land Use Biodiversity and Energy (FABLE)
Consortium as a knowledge platform. FABLE brings together research and policy
teams from 20 developed and developing countries to advance analytical tools
and model-aided decision support to analyze the ability of development
pathways to meet national aspirations, while also collectively aligning with,
among others, the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and the Paris
Agreement.

The IIASA Challenges and Opportunities for Economic Integration within a wider
European and Eurasian Space project served as a platform where key
stakeholders could engage in evidence-based dialogue. In 2018 the project
published three reports containing analyses and recommendations in several
important areas. The first report compared product standards and technical
regulations in the region and revealed that the Eurasian Economic Union has
already adopted international standards more fully than previously realized.
The second report on foreign direct investment highlighted that capital flows
between the European Union and Russia are declining. The third report looked
at trans-Eurasian land transport corridors and argued that enhancing trade
between Europe and Asia would require increased capacity, the removal of
infrastructure bottlenecks, harmonization of regulatory environments, and
enhanced associated investments.

Since 2010, IIASA is one of the three "pillar institutions" of the
Wittgenstein Centre for Demography and Global Human Capital.

The IIASA's Global Energy Assessment was released in 2012. The report was a
result of the collaborative and integrated work of over 500 authors, analysts
and reviewers worldwide who contributed independent, scientifically based and
policy-relevant analysis of current and emerging energy issues and options.
The assessment provides an analysis of energy-related issues including
sustainable development, poverty eradication, climate change mitigation,
health, energy security, and energy access.