Intergovernmental organization and international tribunal

The **International Criminal Court** (**ICC**) is an intergovernmental
organization and international tribunal seated in The Hague, Netherlands.
Established in 2002 under the multilateral Rome Statute, the ICC is the first
and only permanent international court with jurisdiction to prosecute
individuals for the international crimes of genocide, crimes against humanity,
war crimes, and the crime of aggression. The ICC is intended to complement,
not replace, national judicial systems; it can exercise its jurisdiction only
when national courts are unwilling or unable to prosecute criminals. It is
distinct from the International Court of Justice, an organ of the United
Nations that hears disputes between states.

The ICC can generally exercise jurisdiction in cases where the accused is a
national of a state party, the alleged crime took place on the territory of a
state party, or a situation is referred to the Court by the United Nations
Security Council. As of October 2024, there are 125 states parties to the Rome
Statute, which are represented in the court's governing body, the Assembly of
States Parties. A number of countries, including China, India, Russia, and the
United States, are not party to the Rome Statute and do not recognise the
court's jurisdiction.

The Office of the Prosecutor has opened investigations into over a dozen
situations and conducted numerous preliminary examinations. Dozens of
individuals have been indicted, including heads of state and other senior
officials. The court issued its first conviction in 2012 against Congolese
warlord Thomas Lubanga Dyilo for the war crime of using child soldiers. In
recent years, the court has issued arrest warrants for Russian president
Vladimir Putin in connection with the invasion of Ukraine, and for Israeli
prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu and defense minister Yoav Gallant, along
with several Hamas leaders, in connection with the Gaza war.

Since its establishment, the ICC has faced significant criticism. Opponents,
including major powers that have not joined the court, question its
legitimacy, citing concerns over national sovereignty and accusing it of being
susceptible to political influence. The court has also been accused of bias
and of disproportionately targeting leaders in Africa, which prompted several
African nations to threaten or initiate withdrawal from the statute in the
2010s. Others have questioned the court's effectiveness, pointing to its
reliance on state cooperation for arrests, its relatively small number of
convictions, and the high cost of its proceedings.

## History

The premises of the International Criminal Court in The Hague, Netherlands.
The ICC moved into this building in December 2015.

### Background

The establishment of an international tribunal to judge political leaders
accused of international crimes was first proposed during the Paris Peace
Conference in 1919 following the First World War by the Commission of
Responsibilities. The issue was addressed again at a conference held in Geneva
under the auspices of the League of Nations in 1937, which resulted in the
conclusion of the first convention stipulating the establishment of a
permanent international court to try acts of international terrorism. The
convention was signed by 13 states, but none ratified it and the convention
never entered into force.

Following the Second World War, the allied powers established two _ad hoc_
tribunals to prosecute Axis leaders accused of war crimes. The International
Military Tribunal, which sat in Nuremberg and is often referred to as the
"Nuremberg Trials," prosecuted German leaders, including for Nazi perpetration
of The Holocaust, while the International Military Tribunal for the Far East
in Tokyo prosecuted Japanese leaders for war crimes and crimes against
humanity. In 1948 the United Nations General Assembly first recognized the
need for a permanent international court to deal with atrocities of the kind
prosecuted after World War II. At the request of the General Assembly, the
International Law Commission (ILC) drafted two statutes by the early 1950s but
these were shelved during the Cold War, which made the establishment of an
international criminal court politically unrealistic.

Benjamin B. Ferencz, an investigator of Nazi war crimes after World War II and
the Chief Prosecutor for the United States Army at the Einsatzgruppen trial,
became a vocal advocate of the establishment of international rule of law and
of an international criminal court. In his book _Defining International
Aggression: The Search for World Peace_ (1975), he advocated for the
establishment of such a court. Another leading proponent was Robert Kurt
Woetzel, a German-born professor of international law, who co-edited _Toward a
Feasible International Criminal Court_ in 1970 and created the Foundation for
the Establishment of an International Criminal Court in 1971.

### Formal proposal and establishment

In June 1989, the Prime Minister of Trinidad and Tobago, A. N. R. Robinson,
revived the idea of a permanent international criminal court by proposing the
creation of tribunal to address the illegal drug trade. In response, the
General Assembly tasked the ILC with once again drafting a statute for a
permanent court.

While work began on the draft, the UN Security Council established two _ad
hoc_ tribunals in the early 1990s: The International Criminal Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia, created in 1993 in response to large-scale atrocities
committed by armed forces during the Yugoslav Wars, and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, created in 1994 following the Rwandan genocide.
The creation of these tribunals further highlighted to many the need for a
permanent international criminal court.

In 1994, the ILC presented its final draft statute for the International
Criminal Court to the General Assembly and recommended that a conference be
convened to negotiate a treaty that would serve as the Court's statute. To
consider major substantive issues in the draft statute, the General Assembly
established the Ad Hoc Committee on the Establishment of an International
Criminal Court, which met twice in 1995. After considering the Committee's
report, the General Assembly created the Preparatory Committee on the
Establishment of the ICC to prepare a consolidated draft text. From 1996 to
1998, six sessions of the Preparatory Committee were held at the United
Nations headquarters in New York City, during which NGOs provided input and
attended meetings under the umbrella organisation of the Coalition for the
International Criminal Court (CICC). In January 1998, the Bureau and
coordinators of the Preparatory Committee convened for an Inter-Sessional
meeting in Zutphen in the Netherlands to technically consolidate and
restructure the draft articles into a draft.

Finally, the General Assembly convened a conference in Rome in June 1998, with
the aim of finalizing the treaty to serve as the Court's statute. On 17 July
1998, the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court was adopted by a
vote of 120 to seven, with 21 countries abstaining. The seven countries that
voted against the treaty were China, Iraq, Israel, Libya, Qatar, the U.S., and
Yemen.

Israel's opposition to the treaty stemmed from the inclusion in the list of
war crimes "the action of transferring population into occupied territory", a
provision added during the Rome Conference at the insistence of Arab countries
with the specific intention of targeting Israeli citizens.

The UN General Assembly voted on 9 December 1999 and again on 12 December 2000
to endorse the ICC. Following 60 ratifications, the Rome Statute entered into
force on 1 July 2002 and the International Criminal Court was formally
established.

The first bench of 18 judges was elected by the Assembly of States Parties in
February 2003. They were sworn in at the inaugural session of the Court on 11
March 2003.

The Court issued its first arrest warrants on 8 July 2005, and the first pre-
trial hearings were held in 2006.

The Court issued its first judgment in 2012 when it found Congolese rebel
leader Thomas Lubanga Dyilo guilty of war crimes related to using child
soldiers. Lubanga was sentenced to 14 years in prison.

In 2010, the states parties of the Rome Statute held the first Review
Conference of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court in Kampala,
Uganda. The Review Conference led to the adoption of two resolutions that
amended the crimes under the jurisdiction of the Court. Resolution 5 amended
Article 8 on war crimes, criminalizing the use of certain kinds of weapons in
non-international conflicts whose use was already forbidden in international
conflicts. Resolution 6, pursuant to Article 5(2) of the Statute, provided the
definition and a procedure for jurisdiction over the crime of aggression.

## Organization

The ICC has four principal organs: the Presidency, the Judicial Divisions, the
Office of the Prosecutor and the Registry.

  * The President is the most senior judge chosen by the eighteen judges in the Judicial Division.
  * The Judicial Division is composed of eighteen judges and hears cases before the Court.
  * The Office of the Prosecutor is headed by the Prosecutor, who investigates crimes and initiates criminal proceedings before the Judicial Division.
  * The Registry is headed by the Registrar and is charged with managing all the administrative functions of the ICC, including the headquarters, detention unit, and public defense office.

The ICC employs over 900 personnel from roughly 100 countries and conducts
proceedings in English and French.

## Operation

The ICC began operations on 1 July 2002, upon the entry into force of the Rome
Statute, a multilateral treaty that serves as the court's charter and
governing document. States which become party to the Rome Statute become
members of the ICC, serving on the Assembly of States Parties, which
administers the court. As of January 2025, there are 125 ICC member states, 29
states have signed but not ratified the Rome Statute (including four who have
withdrawn their signature) and 41 states have neither signed nor become
parties to the Rome Statute.

Intended to serve as the "court of last resort", the ICC complements existing
national judicial systems and may exercise its jurisdiction only when national
courts are unwilling or unable to prosecute criminals. It lacks universal
territorial jurisdiction and may only investigate and prosecute crimes
committed within member states, crimes committed by nationals of member
states, or crimes in situations referred to the Court by the United Nations
Security Council.

Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu and Russian president Vladimir Putin
in June 2016

The ICC held its first hearing in 2006, concerning war crimes charges against
Thomas Lubanga Dyilo, a Congolese warlord accused of recruiting child
soldiers; his subsequent conviction in 2012 was the first in the court's
history. The Office of the Prosecutor has opened twelve official
investigations and is conducting an additional nine preliminary examinations.

Dozens of individuals have been indicted in the ICC, including Ugandan rebel
leader Joseph Kony, former President Omar al-Bashir of Sudan, President Uhuru
Kenyatta of Kenya, Libyan head of state Muammar Gaddafi, President Laurent
Gbagbo of Ivory Coast and former Vice President Jean-Pierre Bemba of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

On 17 March 2023, ICC judges issued arrest warrants for Russian president
Vladimir Putin and the Presidential Commissioner for Children's Rights in
Russia Maria Lvova-Belova for child abductions in the 2022 Russian invasion of
Ukraine. Russia denounced the arrest warrants as "outrageous". Putin became
the first head of state of a U.N. Security Council Permanent Member to be the
subject of an ICC arrest warrant. Although Russia withdrew its signature from
the Rome Statute in 2016, and is thus not a participant in the ICC nor under
its jurisdiction, Putin can be charged for actions against Ukraine, which is
not a party but has accepted jurisdiction of the court since 2014. Should
Putin travel to a state party, he can be arrested by local authorities. Later
in 2023, Russia's Ministry of Internal Affairs retaliated by placing several
ICC officials on its wanted list. In March 2024, the ICC issued two more
arrest warrants, for Sergey Kobylash, the commander of the Long-Range Aviation
of the Russian Aerospace Forces, and Viktor Sokolov, the commander of the
Black Sea Fleet over their role in war crimes in Ukraine.

On 20 May 2024, the ICC's chief prosecutor Karim Khan announced his intention
to seek arrest warrants for Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu, Israeli
defense minister Yoav Gallant, leader of Hamas Yahya Sinwar, leader of the Al
Qassem Brigades Mohammed Deif, and Hamas political leader Ismail Haniyeh in
connection to war crimes committed in the Israel-Hamas war. On November 21,
warrants were formally issued for Netanyahu, Gallant and Deif. Warrants for
Haniyeh and Sinwar were withdrawn following confirmation of their deaths in
July and October respectively.

On 23 January 2025, the ICC's chief prosecutor Karim Khan announced requests
for arrest warrants against Taliban leader Haibatullah Akhundzada and the
chief justice of Afghanistan Abdul Hakim Haqqani, for crimes against humanity
of the oppression and persecution of Afghan women and girls, who have been
deprived of the freedom of movement, the rights to control their bodies, to
education, and to a private and family life. Alleged resistance and opposition
are brutally suppressed with murder, imprisonment, torture, rape, and other
forms of sexual violence, since 2021. On 8 July 2025, the ICC's Pre-Trial
Chamber II issued the requested arrest warrants.

### Establishing the court's jurisdiction

The process to establish the court's jurisdiction may be "triggered" by any
one of three possible sources: (1) a state party, (2) the Security Council or
(3) a prosecutor. It is then up to the prosecutor acting _proprio motu_ to
initiate an investigation under the requirements of Article 15 of the Rome
Statute. The procedure is slightly different when referred by a state party or
the Security Council, in which cases the prosecutor does not need
authorization of the Pre-Trial Chamber to initiate the investigation. Where
there is a reasonable basis to proceed, it is mandatory for the prosecutor to
initiate an investigation. The factors listed in Article 53 considered for
reasonable basis include whether the case would be admissible, and whether
there are substantial reasons to believe that an investigation would not serve
the interests of justice (the latter stipulates balancing against the gravity
of the crime and the interests of the victims).

## Structure

The ICC is governed by the Assembly of States Parties, which is made up of the
states that are party to the Rome Statute. The Assembly elects officials of
the Court, approves its budget, and adopts amendments to the Rome Statute. The
Court itself has four organs: the Presidency, the Judicial Divisions, the
Office of the Prosecutor, and the Registry.

### State parties

As of January 2025[update], 125 states are parties to the Statute of the
Court, including all the countries of South America, nearly all of Europe,
most of Oceania and roughly half of Africa. Burundi and the Philippines were
member states, but later withdrew effective 27 October 2017 and 17 March 2019,
respectively. A further 29 countries have signed but not ratified the Rome
Statute. The law of treaties obliges these states to refrain from "acts which
would defeat the object and purpose" of the treaty until they declare they do
not intend to become a party to the treaty. Four signatory states have
informed the UN Secretary General that they no longer intend to become states
parties and, as such, have no legal obligations arising from their signature
of the Statute; they are Israel in 2002, the United States on 6 May 2002,
Sudan on 26 August 2008, and Russia on 30 November 2016. Forty-one other
states have neither signed nor acceded to the Rome Statute. Some of them,
including China and India, are critical of the Court.

#### Assembly

The Court's management oversight and legislative body, the Assembly of States
Parties, consists of one representative from each state party. Each state
party has one vote and "every effort" has to be made to reach decisions by
consensus. If consensus cannot be reached, decisions are made by vote. The
Assembly is presided over by a president and two vice-presidents, who are
elected by the members to three-year terms.

The Assembly meets in full session once a year, alternating between New York
and The Hague, and may also hold special sessions where circumstances require.
Sessions are open to observer states and non-governmental organizations.

The Assembly elects the judges and prosecutors, decides the Court's budget,
adopts important texts (such as the Rules of Procedure and Evidence), and
provides management oversight to the other organs of the Court. Article 46 of
the Rome Statute allows the Assembly to remove from office a judge or
prosecutor who "is found to have committed serious misconduct or a serious
breach of his or her duties" or "is unable to exercise the functions required
by this Statute".

The states parties cannot interfere with the judicial functions of the Court.
Disputes concerning individual cases are settled by the Judicial Divisions.

In 2010, Kampala, Uganda hosted the Assembly's Rome Statute Review Conference.

### Organs

The Court has four organs: the Presidency, the Judicial Division, the Office
of the Prosecutor, and the Registry.

#### Presidency

Song Sang-hyun was President of the Court from 2009 to 2015.

The Presidency is responsible for the proper administration of the Court
(apart from the Office of the Prosecutor). It comprises the President and the
First and Second Vice-Presidents—three judges of the Court who are elected to
the Presidency by their fellow judges for a maximum of two three-year terms.

As of March 2024, the President is Tomoko Akane from Japan, who took office on
11 March 2024, succeeding Piotr Hofmański. Her first term will expire in 2027.

#### Judicial Division

The Judicial Divisions consist of the 18 judges of the Court, organized into
three chambers—the Pre-Trial Chamber, Trial Chamber and Appeals Chamber —
which carry out the judicial functions of the Court. Judges are elected to the
Court by the Assembly of States Parties. They serve nine-year terms and are
not generally eligible for re-election. All judges must be nationals of states
parties to the Rome Statute, and no two judges may be nationals of the same
state. They must be "persons of high moral character, impartiality and
integrity who possess the qualifications required in their respective States
for appointment to the highest judicial offices".

The Prosecutor or any person being investigated or prosecuted may request the
disqualification of a judge from "any case in which his or her impartiality
might reasonably be doubted on any ground". Any request for the
disqualification of a judge from a particular case is decided by an absolute
majority of the other judges. Judges may be removed from office if "found to
have committed serious misconduct or a serious breach of his or her duties" or
is unable to exercise his or her functions. The removal of a judge requires
both a two-thirds majority of the other judges and a two-thirds majority of
the states parties.

#### Office of the Prosecutor

ICC prosecutors Fatou Bensouda and Luis Moreno Ocampo, with Estonia's Minister
of Foreign Affairs, Urmas Paet, in 2012

The Office of the Prosecutor (OTP) is responsible for conducting
investigations and prosecutions. It is headed by the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, who is assisted by one or more Deputy
Prosecutors. The Rome Statute provides that the Office of the Prosecutor shall
act independently; as such, no member of the Office may seek or act on
instructions from any external source, such as states, international
organisations, non-governmental organisations or individuals.

The Prosecutor may open an investigation under three circumstances:

  * when a situation is referred by a state party;
  * when a situation is referred by the United Nations Security Council, acting to address a threat to international peace and security; or
  * when the Pre-Trial Chamber authorises the prosecutor to open an investigation on the basis of information received from other sources, such as individuals or non-governmental organisations.

Any person being investigated or prosecuted may request the disqualification
of a prosecutor from any case "in which their impartiality might reasonably be
doubted on any ground". Requests for the disqualification of prosecutors are
decided by the Appeals Chamber. A prosecutor may be removed from office by an
absolute majority of the states parties through a finding "to have committed
serious misconduct or a serious breach of his or her duties" or is unable to
exercise his or her functions. One critic said there are "insufficient checks
and balances on the authority of the ICC prosecutor and judges" and
"insufficient protection against politicized prosecutions or other abuses".
Luis Moreno-Ocampo, chief ICC prosecutor, stressed in 2011 the importance of
politics in prosecutions: "You cannot say al-Bashir is in London, arrest him.
You need a political agreement." Henry Kissinger says the checks and balances
are so weak that the prosecutor "has virtually unlimited discretion in
practice".

Lead prosecutor Luis Moreno Ocampo of Argentina, in office from 2003 to 2012,
was succeeded in the role by Fatou Bensouda of Gambia, who served from 16 June
2012 to 16 June 2021 (she was elected to the nine-year term on 12 December
2011).

On 12 February 2021, British barrister Karim Khan was selected in a secret
ballot against three other candidates to serve as lead prosecutor as of 16
June 2021. As British barrister, Khan had headed the United Nations' special
investigative team when it looked into Islamic State crimes in Iraq. At the
ICC, he had been lead defense counsel on cases from Kenya, Sudan and Libya.

##### Policy papers

The Office of the Prosecutor occasionally publishes policy papers that put
forth the considerations given to topics the office focuses on, and often the
criteria for case selection. While a policy paper does not give the Court
jurisdiction over a new category of crimes, it promises what the Office of
Prosecutor will consider when selecting cases in the upcoming term of service.
OTP's policy papers are subject to revision.

The following papers have been published since the start of the ICC:

  * 1 September 2007: Policy Paper on the Interest of Justice
  * 12 April 2010: Policy Paper on Victims' Participation
  * 1 November 2013: Policy Paper on Preliminary Examinations
  * 20 June 2014: Policy Paper on Sexual and Gender-Based Crimes
  * 15 September 2016: Policy paper on case selection and prioritisation
  * 15 November 2016: Policy on Children

The paper published in September 2016 announced that the ICC will focus on
environmental crimes when selecting cases. The Office will give particular
consideration to prosecuting Rome Statute crimes that are committed by means
of, or that result in, "inter alia, the destruction of the environment, the
illegal exploitation of natural resources or the illegal dispossession of
land". This has been interpreted as a major shift in environmental law and a
move with significant effects.

#### Registry

The Registry is responsible for the non-judicial aspects of the administration
and servicing of the Court. This includes, among other things,

> The administration of legal aid matters, court management, victims and
> witnesses matters, defence counsel, detention unit, and the traditional
> services provided by administrations in international organisations, such as
> finance, translation, building management, procurement and personnel.

The Registry is headed by the Registrar, who is elected by the judges to a
five-year term. As of April 2023 the Registrar is Osvaldo Zavala Giler.

List of Registrars of the ICC  Registrar | Term | Reference   
---|---|---  
Bruno Cathala | 2003–2008 |   
Silvana Arbia | 2008–2013 |   
Herman von Hebel | 2013–2018 |   
Peter Lewis | 2018–2023 |   
Osvaldo Zavala Giler | 2023–present |   
  
## Crimes for which individuals can be prosecuted

The Court's subject-matter jurisdiction means the crimes for which individuals
can be prosecuted. Individuals can only be prosecuted for crimes that are
listed in the Statute. The primary crimes are listed in article 5 of the
Statute and defined in later articles: genocide (defined in article 6), crimes
against humanity (defined in article 7), war crimes (defined in article 8),
and crimes of aggression (defined in article 8 _bis_) (since 2018). In
addition, article 70 defines _offences against the administration of justice_
, which is a fifth category of crime for which individuals can be prosecuted.

### Genocide

Article 6 defines the crime of genocide as "acts committed with intent to
destroy, in whole or in part, a national, ethnical, racial or religious
group." There are five such acts which constitute crimes of genocide under
article 6:

  1. Killing members of a group
  2. Causing serious bodily or mental harm to members of the group
  3. Deliberately inflicting on the group conditions of life calculated to bring about its physical destruction
  4. Imposing measures intended to prevent births within the group
  5. Forcibly transferring children of the group to another group

The definition of these crimes is identical to those contained within the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide of 1948.

### Crimes against humanity

Article 7 defines crimes against humanity as acts "committed as part of a
widespread or systematic attack directed against any civilian population, with
knowledge of the attack". The article lists 16 such as individual crimes:

  1. Murder
  2. Extermination
  3. Enslavement
  4. Deportation or forcible transfer of population
  5. Imprisonment or other severe deprivation of physical liberty
  6. Torture
  7. Rape
  8. Sexual slavery
  9. Enforced prostitution
  10. Forced pregnancy
  11. Enforced sterilization
  12. Sexual violence
  13. Persecution
  14. Enforced disappearance of persons
  15. Apartheid
  16. Other inhumane acts

### War crimes

Article 8 defines war crimes depending on whether an armed conflict is either
international (which generally means it is fought between states) or non-
international (which generally means that it is fought between non-state
actors, such as rebel groups, or between a state and such non-state actors).
The most serious crimes constitute either grave breaches of the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and its Protocols. In total there are 74 war crimes listed
in article 8.

Eleven crimes constitute grave breaches of the Geneva Conventions and apply
only to international armed conflicts:

  1. Willful killing
  2. Torture
  3. Inhumane treatment
  4. Biological experiments
  5. Willfully causing great suffering
  6. Destruction and appropriation of property
  7. Compelling service in hostile forces
  8. Denying a fair trial
  9. Unlawful deportation and transfer
  10. Unlawful confinement
  11. Taking hostages

Seven crimes constitute serious violations of article 3 common to the Geneva
Conventions and apply only to non-international armed conflicts:

  1. Murder
  2. Mutilation
  3. Cruel treatment
  4. Torture
  5. Outrages upon personal dignity
  6. Taking hostages
  7. Sentencing or execution without due process

Another 56 crimes defined by article 8: 35 apply to international armed
conflicts and 21 to non-international armed conflicts. Such crimes include
attacking civilians or civilian objects, attacking peacekeepers, causing
excessive incidental death or damage, transferring populations into occupied
territories, treacherously killing or wounding, denying quarter, pillaging,
employing poison, using expanding bullets, rape and other forms of sexual
violence, and conscripting or using child soldiers.

### Crimes of aggression

Article 8 _bis_ defines crimes of aggression. The Statute originally provided
that the Court could not exercise its jurisdiction over the crime of
aggression until such time as the states parties agreed on a definition of the
crime and set out the conditions under which it could be prosecuted. Such an
amendment was adopted at the first review conference of the ICC in Kampala,
Uganda, in June 2010. This amendment specified that the ICC would not be
allowed to exercise jurisdiction of the crime of aggression until two further
conditions had been satisfied: (1) the amendment has entered into force for 30
states parties and (2) on or after 1 January 2017, the Assembly of States
Parties has voted in favor of allowing the Court to exercise jurisdiction. On
26 June 2016 the first condition was satisfied and the state parties voted in
favor of allowing the Court to exercise jurisdiction on 14 December 2017. The
Court's jurisdiction to prosecute crimes of aggression was accordingly
activated on 17 July 2018.

The Statute, as amended, defines the crime of aggression as "the planning,
preparation, initiation or execution, by a person in a position effectively to
exercise control over or to direct the political or military action of a
State, of an act of aggression which, by its character, gravity and scale,
constitutes a manifest violation of the Charter of the United Nations." The
Statute defines an "act of aggression" as "the use of armed force by a State
against the sovereignty, territorial integrity or political independence of
another State, or in any other manner inconsistent with the Charter of the
United Nations." The article also contains a list of seven acts of aggression,
which are identical to those in United Nations General Assembly Resolution
3314 of 1974 and include the following acts when committed by one state
against another state:

  1. Invasion or attack by armed forces against territory
  2. Military occupation of territory
  3. Annexation of territory
  4. Bombardment against territory
  5. Use of any weapons against territory
  6. Blockade of ports or coasts
  7. Attack on the land, sea, or air forces or marine and air fleets
  8. The use of armed forces which are within the territory of another state by agreement, but in contravention of the conditions of the agreement
  9. Allowing territory to be used by another state to perpetrate an act of aggression against a third state
  10. Sending armed bands, groups, irregulars, or mercenaries to carry out acts of armed force

### Offences against the administration of justice

Article 70 criminalizes certain intentional acts which interfere with
investigations and proceedings before the Court, including giving false
testimony, presenting false evidence, corruptly influencing a witness or
official of the Court, retaliating against an official of the Court, and
soliciting or accepting bribes as an official of the Court.

## Jurisdiction and admissibility

The Rome Statute requires that several criteria exist in a particular case
before an individual can be prosecuted by the Court. The Statute contains
three jurisdictional requirements and three admissibility requirements. All
criteria must be met for a case to proceed. The three jurisdictional
requirements are (1) subject-matter jurisdiction (what acts constitute
crimes), (2) territorial or personal jurisdiction (where the crimes were
committed or who committed them), and (3) temporal jurisdiction (when the
crimes were committed).

For an individual to be prosecuted by the Court either territorial
jurisdiction or personal jurisdiction must exist. Therefore, an individual can
only be prosecuted if he or she has either (1) committed a crime within the
territorial jurisdiction of the Court or (2) committed a crime while being a
national of a state that is within the territorial jurisdiction of the Court.

### Territorial jurisdiction

The territorial jurisdiction of the Court includes the territory, registered
vessels, and registered aircraft of states which have either (1) become party
to the Rome Statute or (2) accepted the Court's jurisdiction by filing a
declaration with the Court.

In situations that are referred to the Court by the United Nations Security
Council, the territorial jurisdiction is defined by the Security Council,
which may be more expansive than the Court's normal territorial jurisdiction.
For example, if the Security Council refers a situation that took place in the
territory of a state that has both not become party to the Rome Statute and
not lodged a declaration with the Court, the Court will still be able to
prosecute crimes that occurred within that state.

### Personal jurisdiction

The personal jurisdiction of the Court extends to all natural persons who
commit crimes, regardless of where they are located or where the crimes were
committed, as long as those individuals are nationals of either (1) states
that are party to the Rome Statute or (2) states that have accepted the
Court's jurisdiction by filing a declaration with the Court. As with
territorial jurisdiction, the personal jurisdiction can be expanded by the
Security Council if it refers a situation to the Court.

### Temporal jurisdiction requirements

Temporal jurisdiction is the time period over which the Court can exercise its
powers. No statute of limitations applies to any of the crimes defined in the
Statute. This is not completely retroactive. Individuals can only be
prosecuted for crimes that took place on or after 1 July 2002, which is the
date that the Rome Statute entered into force. If a state became party to the
Statute, and therefore a member of the Court, after 1 July 2002, then the
Court cannot exercise jurisdiction prior to the membership date for certain
cases. For example, if the Statute entered into force for a state on 1 January
2003, the Court could only exercise temporal jurisdiction over crimes that
took place in that state or were committed by a national of that state on or
after 1 January 2003.

### Admissibility requirements

To initiate an investigation, the Prosecutor must (1) have a "reasonable basis
to believe that a crime within the jurisdiction of the Court has been or is
being committed", (2) the investigation would be consistent with the principle
of complementarity, and (3) the investigation serves the interests of justice.

The principle of complementarity means the Court will only prosecute an
individual if states are unwilling or unable to prosecute. Therefore, if
legitimate national investigations or proceedings into crimes have taken place
or are ongoing, the Court will not initiate proceedings. This principle
applies regardless of the outcome of national proceedings. Even if an
investigation is closed without any criminal charges being filed or if an
accused person is acquitted by a national court, the Court will not prosecute
an individual for the crime in question so long as it is satisfied that the
national proceedings were legitimate. The application of the complementarity
principle has recently come under theoretical scrutiny.

The Court will only initiate proceedings if a crime is of "sufficient gravity
to justify further action by the Court".

The Prosecutor will initiate an investigation unless there are "substantial
reasons to believe that an investigation would not serve the interests of
justice" when "[t]aking into account the gravity of the crime and the
interests of victims". Furthermore, even if an investigation has been
initiated and there are substantial facts to warrant a prosecution and no
other admissibility issues, the Prosecutor must determine whether a
prosecution would serve the interests of justice "taking into account all the
circumstances, including the gravity of the crime, the interests of victims
and the age or infirmity of the alleged perpetrator, and his or her role in
the alleged crime".

### Individual criminal responsibility

The Court has jurisdiction over natural persons. A person who commits a crime
within the jurisdiction of the Court is individually responsible and liable
for punishment in accordance with the Rome Statute. In accordance with the
Rome Statute, a person shall be criminally responsible and liable for
punishment for a crime within the jurisdiction of the Court if that person:
Commits such a crime, whether as an individual, jointly with another or
through another person, regardless of whether that other person is criminally
responsible; Orders, solicits or induces the commission of such a crime which
in fact occurs or is attempted; For the purpose of facilitating the commission
of such a crime, aids, abets or otherwise assists in its commission or its
attempted commission, including providing the means for its commission; In any
other way contributes to the commission or attempted commission of such a
crime by a group of persons acting with a common purpose. In respect of the
crime of genocide, directly and publicly incites others to commit genocide;
Attempts to commit such a crime by taking action that commences its execution
by means of a substantial step, but the crime does not occur because of
circumstances independent of the person's intentions

## Procedure

### Trial

Trials are conducted under a hybrid common law and civil law judicial system,
but it has been argued the procedural orientation and character of the court
is still evolving. A majority of the three judges present, as triers of fact
in a bench trial, may reach a decision, which must include a full and reasoned
statement. Trials are supposed to be public, but proceedings are often closed,
and such exceptions to a public trial have not been enumerated in detail. _In
camera_ proceedings are allowed for protection of witnesses or defendants as
well as for confidential or sensitive evidence. Hearsay and other indirect
evidence is not generally prohibited, but it has been argued the court is
guided by hearsay exceptions which are prominent in common law systems. There
is no subpoena or other means to compel witnesses to come before the court,
although the court has some power to compel testimony of those who chose to
come before it, such as fines.

### Rights of the accused

The Rome Statute provides that all persons are presumed innocent until proven
guilty beyond reasonable doubt, and establishes certain rights of the accused
and persons during investigations. These include the right to be fully
informed of the charges against them; the right to have a lawyer appointed,
free of charge; the right to a speedy trial; and the right to examine the
witnesses against them.

To ensure "equality of arms" between defence and prosecution teams, the ICC
has established an independent Office of Public Counsel for the Defence (OPCD)
to provide logistical support, advice and information to defendants and their
counsel. The OPCD also helps to safeguard the rights of the accused during the
initial stages of an investigation. Thomas Lubanga's defence team said they
were given a smaller budget than the Prosecutor and that evidence and witness
statements were slow to arrive.

### Victim participation

One of the great innovations of the Statute of the International Criminal
Court and its Rules of Procedure and Evidence is the series of rights granted
to victims. For the first time in the history of international criminal
justice, victims have the possibility under the Statute to present their views
and observations before the Court.

Participation before the Court may occur at various stages of proceedings and
may take different forms, although it will be up to the judges to give
directions as to the timing and manner of participation.

Participation in the Court's proceedings will in most cases take place through
a legal representative and will be conducted "in a manner which is not
prejudicial or inconsistent with the rights of the accused and a fair and
impartial trial".

The victim-based provisions within the Rome Statute provide victims with the
opportunity to have their voices heard and to obtain, where appropriate, some
form of reparation for their suffering. It is the aim of this attempted
balance between retributive and restorative justice that, it is hoped, will
enable the ICC to not only bring criminals to justice but also help the
victims themselves obtain some form of justice. Justice for victims before the
ICC comprises both procedural and substantive justice, by allowing them to
participate and present their views and interests, so that they can help to
shape truth, justice and reparations outcomes of the Court.

Article 43(6) establishes a Victims and Witnesses Unit to provide "protective
measures and security arrangements, counseling and other appropriate
assistance for witnesses, victims who appear before the Court, and others who
are at risk on account of testimony given by such witnesses." Article 68 sets
out procedures for the "Protection of the victims and witnesses and their
participation in the proceedings." The Court has also established an Office of
Public Counsel for Victims, to provide support and assistance to victims and
their legal representatives.

### Reparations

Victims before the International Criminal Court can also claim reparations
under Article 75 of the Rome Statute. Reparations can only be claimed when a
defendant is convicted and at the discretion of the Court's judges. So
far[_when?_] the Court has ordered reparations against Thomas Lubanga.
Reparations can include compensation, restitution and rehabilitation, but
other forms of reparations may be appropriate for individual, collective or
community victims. Article 79 of the Rome Statute establishes a Trust Fund to
provide assistance before a reparation order to victims in a situation or to
support reparations to victims and their families if the convicted person has
no money.

### Cooperation by states not party to Rome Statute

One of the principles of international law is that a treaty does not create
either obligations or rights for third states without their consent, and this
is also enshrined in the 1969 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties. The
cooperation of the non-party states with the ICC is envisioned by the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court to be of voluntary nature. States
not acceded to the Rome Statute might still be subject to an obligation to
cooperate with ICC in certain cases. When a case is referred to the ICC by the
UN Security Council all UN member states are obliged to cooperate, since its
decisions are binding for all of them. Also, there is an obligation to respect
and ensure respect for international humanitarian law, which stems from the
Geneva Conventions and Additional Protocol I, which reflects the absolute
nature of international humanitarian law.

In relation to cooperation in investigation and evidence gathering, it is
implied from the Rome Statute that the consent of a non-party state is a
prerequisite for ICC Prosecutor to conduct an investigation within its
territory, and it seems that it is even more necessary for him to observe any
reasonable conditions raised by that state, since such restrictions exist for
states party to the Statute. Taking into account the experience of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (which worked with
the principle of the primacy, instead of complementarity) in relation to
cooperation, some scholars have expressed their pessimism as to the
possibility of ICC to obtain cooperation of non-party states. As for the
actions that ICC can take toward non-party states that do not cooperate, the
Rome Statute stipulates that the Court may inform the Assembly of States
Parties or Security Council, when the matter was referred by it, when non-
party state refuses to cooperate after it has entered into an _ad hoc_
arrangement or an agreement with the Court.

### Amnesty and national reconciliation processes

It is unclear to what extent the ICC is compatible with reconciliation
processes that grant amnesty to human rights abusers as part of agreements to
end conflict. Article 16 of the Rome Statute allows the Security Council to
prevent the Court from investigating or prosecuting a case, and Article 53
allows the Prosecutor the discretion not to initiate an investigation if he or
she believes that "an investigation would not serve the interests of justice".
Former ICC president Philippe Kirsch has said that "some limited amnesties may
be compatible" with a country's obligations genuinely to investigate or
prosecute under the Statute.

It is sometimes argued that amnesties are necessary to allow the peaceful
transfer of power from abusive regimes. By denying states the right to offer
amnesty to human rights abusers, the International Criminal Court may make it
more difficult to negotiate an end to conflict and a transition to democracy.
For example, the outstanding arrest warrants for four leaders of the Lord's
Resistance Army are regarded by some as an obstacle to ending the insurgency
in Uganda. Czech politician Marek Benda argues that "the ICC as a deterrent
will in our view only mean the worst dictators will try to retain power at all
costs". The United Nations and the International Committee of the Red Cross
maintain that granting amnesty to those accused of war crimes and other
serious crimes is a violation of international law.

## Facilities

### Headquarters

The official seat of the Court is in The Hague, Netherlands, but its
proceedings may take place anywhere.

Headquarters, 2020

The Court moved into its first permanent premises in The Hague, located at
Oude Waalsdorperweg 10, on 14 December 2015. Part of The Hague's International
Zone, which also contains the Peace Palace, Europol, Eurojust, ICTY, OPCW and
The Hague World Forum, the court facilities are situated on the site of the
_Alexanderkazerne_ , a former military barracks, adjacent to the dune
landscape on the northern edge of the city. The ICC's detention centre is a
short distance away.

The land and financing for the construction were provided by the Netherlands.
The host state also organised and financed the architectural design
competition, which started at the end of 2008. Three architects were chosen by
an international jury from 171 applicants to enter into further negotiations.
The Danish firm Schmidt Hammer Lassen were selected to design the premises,
since its design met all the ICC criteria, such as design quality,
sustainability, functionality and costs.

The former (provisional) headquarters of the ICC, in use until December 2015

The barracks were demolished from November 2011 to August 2012. In October
2012 the tendering procedure for the general contractor was completed and the
combination Visser & Smit Bouw and Boele & van Eesteren ("Courtys") was
selected.

The building has a compact footprint and consists of six connected building
volumes with a garden motif. The tallest volume with a green façade, placed in
the middle of the design, is the Court Tower, which accommodates three
courtrooms. The rest of the building's volumes accommodate the offices of the
different organs of the ICC.

From 2002 to late 2015, the ICC was housed in interim premises in The Hague
provided by the Netherlands. Formerly belonging to KPN, the provisional
headquarters were located at Maanweg 174 in the east-central portion of the
city.

### Detention centre

The ICC's detention centre accommodates both those convicted by the court and
serving sentences as well as those suspects detained pending the outcome of
their trial. It comprises twelve cells on the premises of the Scheveningen
branch of the Hague Penitentiary Institution, The Hague, close to the ICC's
headquarters in the Alexanderkazerne. Suspects held by the former
International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia were held in the
same prison and shared some facilities, like the fitness room, but had no
contact with suspects held by the ICC.

### Other offices

The ICC maintains a liaison office in New York and field offices in places
where it conducts its activities. As of 18 October 2007, the Court had field
offices in Kampala, Kinshasa, Bunia, Abéché and Bangui.

## Finance

Top 10 contributions as of 31 December 2020  No.  | Country  | Contributions €  | Percent %   
---|---|---|---  
1  |  Japan | 24,311,100  | 16.3   
2  |  Germany | 16,193,649  | 10.9   
3  |  France | 12,566,339  | 8.4   
4  |  United Kingdom | 12,143,931  | 8.2   
5  |  Italy | 8,793,501  | 5.9   
6  |  Brazil | 8,255,791  | 5.6   
7  |  Canada | 7,269,812  | 4.9   
8  |  South Korea | 6,258,761  | 4.2   
9  |  Australia | 5,876,461  | 4.0   
10  |  Spain | 5,706,356  | 3.8   
Others  | 41,350,083  | 27.8   
Total  | 148,725,784  | 100.0   
  
The ICC is financed by contributions from the states parties. The amount
payable by each state party is determined using the same method as the United
Nations: each state's contribution is based on the country's capacity to pay,
which reflects factors such as a national income and population. The maximum
amount a single country can pay in any year is limited to 22% of the Court's
budget; Japan paid this amount in 2008.

The Court spent €80.5 million in 2007. The Assembly of States Parties approved
a budget of €90.4 million for 2008, €101.2 million for 2009, and €141.6
million for 2017. As of April 2017[update], the ICC's staff consisted of 800
persons from approximately 100 states.

## Trial history

The ICC issued an arrest warrant for Omar al-Bashir of Sudan over alleged war
crimes in Darfur.

The Court's Pre-Trial Chambers have publicly indicted 73 people. Proceedings
against 39 are ongoing: 33 are at large as fugitives, one person has been
arrested by national authorities, one person's case is in the pre-trial stage,
two are on trial, and two cases are in the appeals stage. Proceedings against
34 have been completed: three are serving sentences, seven have finished
sentences, four have been acquitted, seven have had the charges against them
dismissed, four have had the charges against them withdrawn, and nine have
died before the conclusion of the proceedings against them.

Thomas Lubanga, Germain Katanga and Mathieu Ngudjolo Chui were tried by the
ICC. Lubanga and Katanga were convicted and sentenced to 14 and 12 years
imprisonment, respectively, whereas Chui was acquitted.

The judgment of Jean-Pierre Bemba was rendered in March 2016. Bemba was
convicted on two counts of crimes against humanity and three counts of war
crimes. This marked the first time the ICC convicted someone of sexual
violence as they added rape to his conviction. Bemba's convictions were
overturned by the Court's Appeal Chamber in June 2018. The Court refused to
compensate Bemba for losses suffered by him during his 10 years of
imprisonment. It has been argued that this decision raises important questions
about the court's present powers.

_Ntaganda_ (DR Congo) was convicted to 30 years for crimes against humanity.
The _Bemba et al._ OAJ case and the _Laurent Gbagbo-Blé Goudé_ trial in the
Côte d'Ivoire situation ended in acquittals. The _Banda_ trial in the
situation of Darfur, Sudan, was scheduled to begin in 2014 but the start date
was vacated.

Charges against Malian Ahmad al-Faqi al-Mahdi have been confirmed and he was
sentenced to nine years in prison. On 25 November 2021, his sentence was
commuted to 7 years in prison, and he was released on 18 September 2022.
Ugandan Dominic Ongwen has been convicted to a prison sentence of 25 years.

On 6 July 2020, two Uyghur activist groups filed a complaint with the ICC
calling for it to investigate PRC officials for crimes against Uyghurs,
including allegations of genocide. In December 2020, ICC prosecutors rejected
the complaint, stating that the ICC did not have jurisdictional basis to
proceed.

On 31 October 2023, the Israeli families of over 34 victims of the 2023 Hamas-
led attack on Israel, filed an Article 15 communication with the ICC
prosecutor's office urging an investigation into the killings and abductions,
and the ICC confirmed the receipt of the filing. Reporters Without Borders
also lodged a complaint regarding the deaths of eight Palestinian journalists
in the Gaza Strip during Israel's bombardment, as well as an Israeli
journalist killed during a surprise attack by Hamas in southern Israel.

## Investigations and preliminary examinations

ICC investigations and examinations, as of March 2022  
**Green:** Official investigations (Uganda, DR Congo, Central African Republic
I + II, Darfur (Sudan), Kenya, Libya, Côte d'Ivoire, Mali, Georgia, Burundi,
Afghanistan, Palestine, Venezuela I, Bangladesh/Myanmar, Philippines, Ukraine)  
**Orange:** Authorization to open investigation requested (none at present)  
**Light red:** Ongoing preliminary examinations (Nigeria, Guinea, Venezuela
II)  
**Dark red:** Closed preliminary examinations that have not resulted in an
investigation (Colombia, Iraq, Honduras, South Korea, Comoros (registered
vessels), Gabon, Bolivia)

Currently, the Office of the Prosecutor has opened investigations in
Afghanistan, Bangladesh/Myanmar, Burundi, the Central African Republic
(twice), Côte d'Ivoire, Darfur in Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Georgia, Kenya, Libya, Mali, Palestine, the Philippines, Uganda, Ukraine, and
Venezuela I. The Office of the Prosecutor carried out and closed preliminary
investigations in Bolivia; Colombia; Congo II; Gabon; Guinea; Honduras;
Iraq/the United Kingdom; registered vessels of Comoros, Greece, and Cambodia;
and South Korea. Ongoing preliminary examinations are being carried out in
situations in Lithuania/Belarus, Nigeria, and Venezuela II.  
**Key:**  
 _Investigation_  
 _Investigation pending authorization_  
 _Preliminary examination ongoing_  
 _Preliminary examination closed_

Situation  | Referred by  | Referred on  | Preliminary examination on  | Investigation on  | Current status  | Ref(s).  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
Democratic Republic of the Congo | Democratic Republic of the Congo | 19 April 2004 | 16 July 2003 | 23 June 2004 | Investigation (phase 1)  |   
Côte d'Ivoire | —  | —  | 1 October 2003 | 3 October 2011 | Investigation (phase 1)  |   
Uganda | Uganda  | 16 December 2003 | 16 December 2003 | 29 July 2004 | Investigation (phase 2)  |   
Colombia  | —  | —  | 30 June 2004 | —  | Preliminary examination closed on 28 October 2021 |   
Central African Republic I  | Central African Republic  | 7 January 2005 | 7 January 2005 | 22 May 2007 | Investigation (phase 2)  |   
Darfur, Sudan | United Nations Security Council  | 31 March 2005 | 1 April 2005 | 6 June 2005 | Investigation (phase 1)  |   
Iraq/United Kingdom | —  | —  | 9 February 2006 | —  | Preliminary examination closed on 9 December 2020 |   
Venezuela  | —  | —  | 9 February 2006 | —  | Preliminary examination closed on 9 February 2006 |   
Afghanistan | —  | —  | 2007 | 5 March 2020 | Investigation (phase 1)  |   
Kenya | —  | —  | 5 February 2008 | 31 March 2010 | Investigation (phase 2)  |   
Georgia | —  | —  | 20 August 2008 | 27 January 2016 | Investigation (phase 2)  |   
Palestine  | —  | —  | 22 January 2009 | —  | Preliminary examination closed on 3 April 2012 |   
Guinea  | —  | —  | 14 October 2009 | —  | Preliminary examination closed on 29 September 2022 |   
Honduras  | —  | —  | 18 November 2009 | —  | Preliminary examination closed on 28 October 2015 |   
Nigeria  | —  | —  | 18 November 2010 | —  | Preliminary examination (phase 3)  |   
South Korea | —  | —  | 6 December 2010 | —  | Preliminary examination closed on 23 June 2014 |   
Libya | United Nations Security Council  | 26 February 2011 | 28 February 2011 | 3 March 2011 | Investigation (phase 1)  |   
Mali | Mali  | 18 July 2012 | 18 July 2012 | 16 January 2013 | Investigation (phase 1)  |   
Registered vessels  | Comoros  | 14 May 2013 | 14 May 2013 | —  | Preliminary examination closed on 2 December 2019 |   
Central African Republic II  | Central African Republic  | 30 May 2014 | 7 February 2014 | 24 September 2014 | Investigation (phase 2)  |   
Ukraine | Albania _et al._ | 2 March 2022 | 25 April 2014 | 2 March 2022 | Investigation (phase 1)  |   
Palestine | Palestine  | 22 May 2018 | 16 January 2015 | 3 March 2021 | Investigation (phase 1)  |   
Burundi  | —  | —  | 25 April 2016 | 25 October 2017 | Investigation (phase 1)  |   
Gabon  | Gabon  | 21 September 2016 | 29 September 2016 | —  | Preliminary examination closed on 21 September 2018 |   
Philippines | —  | —  | 8 February 2018 | 15 September 2021 | Investigation (phase 1)  |   
Venezuela I | Argentina _et al._ | 27 September 2018 | 8 February 2018 | 3 November 2021 | Investigation (phase 1)  |   
Bangladesh/Myanmar | —  | —  | 18 September 2018 | 14 November 2019 | Investigation (phase 1)  |   
Venezuela II  | Venezuela  | 13 February 2020 | 17 February 2020 | —  | Preliminary examination (phase 2)  |   
Bolivia  | Bolivia  | 4 September 2020 | 9 September 2020 | —  | Preliminary examination closed on 14 February 2022 |   
Democratic Republic of the Congo II | Democratic Republic of the Congo | 23 May 2023 | 15 June 2023 | —  | Preliminary examination closed on 14 October 2024 |   
Lithuania/Belarus  | Lithuania  | 30 September 2024 | 30 September 2024 | —  | Preliminary examination (phase 1)  |   
**Notes**  

  1. **^** The Office of the Prosecutor processes preliminary examinations through different phases. Every communication is first given an initial assessment to determine if it is sufficiently serious and if it falls within the Court's jurisdiction (phase 1). If it does, the Office begins a preliminary examination by first considering whether the alleged crimes fall within the subject-matter jurisdiction of the Court (phase 2). If the Office is satisfied that all the jurisdictional requirements are met, it then focuses on issues of admissibility by considering complementarity and the gravity of the alleged crimes (phase 3). If there are no admissibility concerns, the Office then considers the interests of justice and decides whether or not to begin a formal investigation (phase 4). Once a formal investigation is opened, it is also processed through different phases. It is first processed through an "investigation phase" (phase 1), in which the Office determines the scope of its caseload, and then through a "prosecution phase" (phase 2), in which the Office completes the caseload.
  2. **^** The preliminary examination of the situation in Iraq / the United Kingdom was initially closed on 9 February 2006, but was reopened on 13 May 2014.
  3. **^** Following the start of the investigation, Chile, Costa Rica, Spain, France, Luxembourg, and Mexico referred the situation.
  4. **^** A new preliminary investigation of the situation in Palestine was opened on 16 January 2015 and proceeded to a full investigation 3 March 2021.
  5. **^** The preliminary examination relates to registered vessels of the Comoros, Greece and Cambodia.
  6. **^** The Prosecutor previously closed the preliminary examination of the situation on registered vessels of the Comoros, Greece and Cambodia on 6 November 2014, but reconsidered her decision following a request by the Pre-Trial Chamber on 29 November 2017 and revised the final decision on 2 December 2019.
  7. **^** Albania, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, New Zealand, Norway, the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom jointly referred the situation in Ukraine on 2 March 2022. Following the start of the investigation, Japan and North Macedonia also referred the situation.
  8. **^** Following the start of the investigation, Bangladesh, Bolivia, Chile, Comoros, Djibouti, Mexico, and South Africa also referred the situation.
  9. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Argentina, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Paraguay, and Peru jointly referred the situation in Venezuela I on 27 September 2018. Venezuela referred the situation in Venezuela II on 13 February 2020. In a statement, the Prosecutor noted that the two referrals "appear to overlap geographically and temporally" but further noted that such a statement "should not prejudice a later determination on whether the referred scope of the two situations is sufficiently linked to constitute a single situation."

  
Summary of investigations and prosecutions by the International Criminal Court (not including reparations proceedings)  Situation  | Publicly indicted  | Ongoing procedures  | Procedures finished, due to ...  | PTC | TCs  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
Not before court  | Pre-Trial  | Trial  | Appeal  | Death  | Inadmissibility  | Acquittal etc.  | Conviction   
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |   
Democratic Republic of the Congo | 6  | 1  
Mudacumura | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | 2  
Chui, Mbarushimana | 3  
Katanga, Lubanga, Ntaganda | I  |   
Uganda | 5  | 1  
Kony | 0  | 0  | 0  | 3  
Lukwiya, Odhiambo, Otti | 0  | 0  | 1  
Ongwen | III  |   
Central African Republic I  | 5  | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | 1  
Bemba (main case) | 5  
Kilolo, Babala, Mangenda, Arido, Bemba (OAJ) | II  |   
Darfur, Sudan | 7  | 3  
Haroun, al-Bashir, Hussein | 1  
Banda | 1  
Abd-Al-Rahman | 0  | 1  
Jerbo | 0  | 1  
Abu Garda | 0  | II  | I  
Kushayb  
IV  
Banda  
Kenya | 9  | 2  
Barasa, Bett | 0  | 0  | 0  | 1  
Gicheru | 0  | 6  
Kosgey, Ali, Muthaura, Kenyatta, Ruto, Sang | 0  | II  |   
Libya | 14  | 10  
S. Gaddafi, Sneidel, Al Kani, Douma, Al Lahsa, Salheen, Al Shaqaqi, Al Zinkal, Njeem, El Hishri | 0  | 0  | 0  | 3  
M. Gaddafi, Khaled, Werfalli | 1  
Senussi | 0  | 0  | I  |   
Côte d'Ivoire  | 3  | 0  | 0  |  | 0  | 0  | 0  | 3  
L. Gbagbo, Blé Goudé, S. Gbagbo | 0  | II  |   
Mali | 3  | 1  
Ghaly | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | 2  
al-Mahdi, al-Hassan | I  |   
Central African Republic II  | 6  | 2  
Adam, Beina | 0  | 1  
Said | 2  
Yekatom, Ngaïssona | 0  | 0  | 1  
Mokom | 0  | II  | V  
Yekatom, Ngaïssona  
VI  
Said  
Georgia | 3  | 3  
Guchmazov, Mindzaev, Sanakoev | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | I  |   
Burundi  | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | II  |   
Bangladesh / Myanmar | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | I  |   
Afghanistan | 2  | 2  
Akhundzada, Haqqani | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | II  |   
Palestine | 3  | 2  
Gallant, Netanyahu | 0  | 0  | 0  | 1  
Deif | 0  | 0  | 0  | I  |   
Philippines | 1  | 0  | 1  
Duterte | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | I  |   
Venezuela I | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | I  |   
Ukraine | 6  | 6  
Putin, Lvova-Belova, Kobylash, Sokolov, Shoigu, Gerasimov | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | II  |   
Total  | 73  | 33  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 9  | 1  | 14  | 11  |   
  
**Notes**

  1. **^** A situation is listed here if an investigation was begun by the Prosecutor.
  2. **^** Indicted but has not yet appeared before the Court.
  3. **^** Indicted and has had at least first appearance; trial has not yet begun.
  4. **^** Trial has begun but has not yet been completed.
  5. **^** Trial has been completed and verdict delivered but appeal is pending.
  6. **^** Indicted but died before the trial or appeal (where applicable) was concluded.
  7. **^** Indicted but case was held inadmissible.
  8. **^** Indicted but either charges not confirmed or withdrawn or proceedings terminated or acquitted. If charges were not confirmed or withdrawn or if proceedings were terminated, the Prosecutor may again prosecute with fresh evidence.
  9. **^** Pre-Trial Chamber currently in charge
  10. **^** Trial Chambers currently in charge; once proceedings have moved to the Appeals Chamber, the Trial Chamber designation will be removed here.

Overview on cases currently active before the ICC (excludes cases against fugitives and reparations proceedings)  Between initial appearance and beginning of confirmation of charges hearing  | Between beginning of confirmation of charges hearing and beginning of trial  | Between beginning of trial and judgment  | Between trial judgment and appeals judgment   
---|---|---|---  
|  |  | Yekatom, Ngaïssona   
|  | Abd-Al-Rahman  |   
|  | Said  |   
| Banda  |  |   
Duterte  |  |  |   
Detailed summary of investigations and prosecutions by the International Criminal Court  **Situation** | **Individuals  
indicted**  
| **Indicted** | **_Transfer to ICC_  
Initial appearance**  
| **_Confirmation of charges hearing_  
Result** | **_Trial_  
Result** | **_Appeal hearings_  
Result** | **Current status** | **Ref.**  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
Date  | G | CAH | WC | OAJ  
Democratic Republic of the Congo  
Investigation article | Thomas Lubanga Dyilo | 10 February 2006 | —  | —  | 3  | —  | _17 March 2006_  
20 March 2006 | _9-28 November 2006_  
confirmed 29 January 2007 | _26 January 2009_ – _26 August 2011_  
convicted 14 March 2012  
sentenced 10 July 2012 | _19–20 May 2014_  
verdict and sentence confirmed  
1 December 2014 | Convicted and sentenced to 14 years imprisonment; **decision final** ; reparations regime established; ICC-related **sentence served** (after 14 years)  |   
Bosco Ntaganda | 22 August 2006  
13 July 2012 | —  | 3  | 7  | —  | _22 March 2013_  
26 March 2013  | _10-14 February 2014_  
confirmed  
9 June 2014 | _2 September 2015_ \- _30 August 2018_  
convicted 8 July 2019  
sentenced 7 November 2019 | Verdict and sentence confirmed  
30 March 2021 | Convicted and sentenced to 30 years imprisonment; **decision final** ; in custody of Belgian authorities; release between 2033 and 2043  |   
Germain Katanga | 2 July 2007 | —  | 3  | 6  | —  | _17 October 2007_  
22 October 2007 | _27 June–18 July 2008_  
confirmed 26 September 2008 | _24 November 2009 – 23 May 2012_  
convicted 7 March 2014  
sentenced 23 May 2014 | Appeals by Prosecution and Defence discontinued  | Convicted and sentenced to 12 years imprisonment; **decision final** ; reparations regime established; ICC-related **sentence served** (after 8 years, 4 months); remained in custody of DRC authorities due to other charges  |   
Mathieu Ngudjolo Chui | 6 July 2007 | —  | 3  | 6  | —  | _6 February 2008_  
11 February 2008 | _24 November 2009 – 23 May 2012_  
**acquitted** 18 December 2012 | _21 October 2014_  
acquittal confirmed 27 February 2015 | Acquitted; **decision final** |   
Callixte Mbarushimana | 28 September 2010 | —  | 5  | 6  | —  | _25 January 2011_  
28 January 2011 | _16-21 September 2011_  
**dismissed** 16 December 2011 |  | **Proceedings finished** with charges dismissed, released  |   
Sylvestre Mudacumura | 13 July 2012 | —  | —  | 9  | —  |  |  |  |  | Not in ICC custody; reportedly died on 17/18 September 2019  |   
Uganda  
Investigation article | Joseph Kony | 8 July 2005 | —  | 12  | 21  | —  |  |  |  |  | Not in ICC custody  |   
Okot Odhiambo | —  | 3  | 7  | —  |  | **Proceedings finished** due to death   
Raska Lukwiya | —  | 1  | 3  | —  |  | **Proceedings finished** due to death   
Vincent Otti | —  | 11  | 21  | —  |  | **Proceedings finished** due to death   
Dominic Ongwen | —  | 3  | 4  | —  | _21 January 2015_  
26 January 2015 | _21–27 January 2016_  
confirmed  
23 March 2016 | _6 December 2016_ – _12 March 2020_  
convicted  
4 February 2021  
sentenced  
6 May 2021 | _14-18 February 2022_  
verdict and sentence confirmed  
15 December 2022 | Convicted and sentenced to 25 years of imprisonment; **decision final** ; in custody of Norwegian authorities, release between 2031 and 2040  |   
Central African Republic | Jean-Pierre Bemba | 23 May 2008  
10 June 2008 | —  | 3  | 5  | —  | _3 July 2008_  
4 July 2008 | _12-15 January 2009_  
confirmed 15 June 2009 | _22 November 2010 – 13 November 2014_  
convicted  
21 March 2016  
sentenced  
21 June 2016 | _9-16 January 2018_  
**acquitted**  
8 June 2018 | Acquitted; **decision final** |   
20 November 2013 | —  | —  | —  | 2  | _23 November 2013_  
27 November 2013 | _in writing_  
confirmed  
11 November 2014 | _29 September 2015 – 2 June 2016_  
convicted  
19 October 2016  
sentenced  
22 March 2017  
partially re-sentenced upon appeal  
17 September 2018 | Verdicts modified and re-sentencing partially remanded to Trial Chamber  
8 March 2018  
re-sentencing confirmed  
27 November 2019 | Convicted and sentenced to one year of imprisonment and a fine of 300,000 USD; **decision final** ; **sentence served** |   
Aimé Kilolo Musamba  | —  | —  | —  | 2  | _25 November 2013_  
27 November 2013 | Convicted and sentenced to a fine of 30,000 USD; **decision final**  
Fidèle Babala Wandu  | —  | —  | —  | 2  | Convicted and sentenced to six months of imprisonment; **decision final** ; **sentence served**  
Jean-Jacques Mangenda Kabongo  | —  | —  | —  | 2  | _4 December 2013_  
5 December 2013 | Convicted and sentenced to eleven months of imprisonment; **decision final** ; **sentence served**  
Narcisse Arido  | —  | —  | —  | 2  | _18 March 2014_  
20 March 2014 | Convicted and sentenced to eleven months of imprisonment; **decision final** ; **sentence served**  
Darfur, Sudan  
Investigation article | Ahmed Haroun | 27 April 2007 | —  | 20  | 22  | —  |  |  |  |  | Not in ICC custody  |   
Ali Muhammad Ali Abd-Al-Rahman | —  | 22  | 28  | —  | _9 June 2020_  
15 June 2020 | _24-26 May 2021_  
confirmed 9 July 2021  
| _5 April 2022 –_ |  | In ICC custody, charges confirmed, trial before Trial-Chamber I ongoing  |   
Omar al-Bashir | 4 March 2009  
12 July 2010 | 3  | 5  | 2  | —  |  |  |  |  | Not in ICC custody  |   
Bahr Idriss Abu Garda | 7 May 2009  
(summons)  | —  | —  | 3  | —  | 18 May 2009 | _19-29 October 2009_  
**dismissed** 8 February 2010  
|  | **Proceedings finished** with charges dismissed  |   
Abdallah Banda | 27 August 2009  
(summons)  
11 September 2014  
(warrant of arrest)  | —  | —  | 3  | —  | 17 June 2010 | _8 December 2010_  
confirmed 7 March 2011 |  |  | At large under warrant of arrest, previously appeared voluntarily, charges confirmed, trial before Trial Chamber IV to begin  |   
Saleh Jerbo | 27 August 2009  
(summons)  | —  | —  | 3  | —  |  | **Proceedings finished** due to death   
Abdel Raheem Muhammad Hussein | 1 March 2012 | —  | 7  | 6  | —  |  |  |  |  | Not in ICC custody  |   
Kenya  
Investigation article | William Ruto | 8 March 2011  
(summons)  | —  | 4  | —  | —  | 7 April 2011 | _1-8 September 2011_  
confirmed 23 January 2012 | _10 September 2013 –  
5 April 2016_  
(**terminated**)  |  | **Proceedings terminated** with no prejudice to re-prosecution, appeal possible  |   
Joshua Sang | —  | 4  | —  | —  |   
Henry Kosgey | —  | 4  | —  | —  | _1-8 September 2011_  
**dismissed** 23 January 2012 |  | **Proceedings finished** with charges dismissed   
Francis Muthaura | 8 March 2011  
(summons)  | —  | 5  | —  | —  | 8 April 2011 | _21 September – 5 October 2011_  
confirmed 23 January 2012 |  | **Proceedings finished** with confirmed charges withdrawn before trial  |   
Uhuru Kenyatta | —  | 5  | —  | —  |   
Mohammed Hussein Ali | —  | 5  | —  | —  | _21 September – 5 October 2011_  
**dismissed** 23 January 2012 |  | **Proceedings finished** with charges dismissed   
Walter Barasa  | 2 August 2013 | —  | —  | —  | 3  |  |  |  |  | Not in ICC custody  |   
Paul Gicheru | 10 March 2015 | —  | —  | —  | 6  | _3 November 2020_  
6 November 2020 | confirmed 15 July 2021 | _15 February 2022 – 27 June 2022_ |  | **Proceedings finished** due to death  |   
Philip Kipkoech Bett  | —  | —  | —  | 4  |  |  |  |  | Not in ICC custody  |   
Libya  
Investigation article | Muammar Gaddafi | 27 June 2011 | —  | 2  | —  | —  |  | **Proceedings finished** due to death |   
Saif al-Islam Gaddafi | —  | 2  | —  | —  |  |  |  |  | Not in ICC custody   
Abdullah Senussi | —  | 2  | —  | —  |  | **Proceedings finished** with case held inadmissible   
Al-Tuhamy Mohamed Khaled | 18 April 2013 | —  | 4  | 3  | —  |  | **Proceedings finished** due to death  |   
Mahmoud al-Werfalli | 15 August 2017  
4 July 2018 | —  | —  | 7  | —  |  | **Proceedings finished** due to death  |   
Saif Suleiman Sneidel  | 10 November 2020 | —  | —  | 3  | —  |  |  |  |  | Not in ICC custody  |   
Abdulrahem Al Kani  | 6 April 2023 | —  | —  | 4  | —  |  |  |  |  | Not in ICC custody  |   
Makhlouf Douma  | —  | —  | 4  | —  |  |  |  |  | Not in ICC custody  |   
Nasser Al Lahsa  | —  | —  | 4  | —  |  |  |  |  | Not in ICC custody  |   
Mohamed Salheen  | —  | —  | 6  | —  |  |  |  |  | Not in ICC custody  |   
Abdelbari Al Shaqaqi  | 18 July 2023 | —  | —  | 4  | —  |  |  |  |  | Not in ICC custody  |   
Fathi Al Zinkal  | —  | —  | 6  | —  |  |  |  |  | Not in ICC custody  |   
Osama Elmasry Njeem  | 18 January 2025 | —  | 6  | 6  | —  |  |  |  |  | Not in ICC custody  |   
Khaled Mohamed Ali El Hishri  | 10 July 2025 | —  | 6  | 6  | —  |  |  |  |  | Arrested on 16 July 2025, in custody of German authorities; extradition proceedings to the ICC started  |   
Ivory Coast | Laurent Gbagbo | 23 November 2011 | —  | 4  | —  | —  | _30 November 2011_  
5 December 2011 | _19–28 February 2013_  
confirmed  
12 June 2014 | _28 January 2016_ – _15 January 2019_  
**acquitted**  
15 January 2019 | Acquittal confirmed  
31 March 2021 | Acquitted; **decision final** |   
Charles Blé Goudé | 21 December 2011 | —  | 4  | —  | —  | _22–23 March 2014_  
27 March 2014 | _29 September –  
2 October 2014_  
confirmed  
11 December 2014  
Simone Gbagbo | 29 February 2012 | —  | 4  | —  | —  |  | **Proceedings finished** with charges withdrawn  |   
Mali  
Investigation article | Ahmad al-Faqi al-Mahdi | 18 September 2015 | —  | —  | 1  | —  | _26 September 2015_  
30 September 2015 | _1 March 2016_  
confirmed  
24 March 2016 | _22–24 August 2016_  
convicted and sentenced  
27 September 2016 |  | Convicted and sentenced to nine years imprisonment; **decision final** ; reparations regime established; ICC-related **sentence served** (after seven years)  |   
Iyad Ag Ghaly | 18 July 2017 | —  | 6  | 4  | —  |  |  |  |  | Not in ICC custody  |   
Al Hassan Ag Abdoul Aziz | 27 March 2018 | —  | 4  | 4  | —  | _31 March 2018_  
4 April 2018 | _8–17 July 2019_  
confirmed  
30 September 2019 | _14 July 2020 – 25 May 2023_  
convicted  
26 June 2024  
sentenced  
20 November 2024 | Appeals by Prosecution and Defence discontinued  | Convicted and sentenced to 10 years of imprisonment; **decision final** ; set to be released in 2027  |   
Central African Republic II  | Alfred Yekatom | 11 November 2018 | —  | 6  | 7  | —  | _17 November 2018_  
23 November 2018 | _19 September 2019_ – _11 October 2019_  
confirmed  
11 December 2019 | _16 February 2021 – 12 December 2024_  
convicted and sentenced  
24 July 2025  |  | In ICC custody, convicted and sentenced to 15 years imprisonment, appeals possible; if conviction and sentence stand, to be released between 2028 and 2033  |   
Patrice-Edouard Ngaïssona | 7 December 2018 | —  | 7  | 9  | —  | _23 January 2019_  
25 January 2019 |  | In ICC custody, convicted and sentenced to 12 years imprisonment, appeals possible; if conviction and sentence stand, to be released between 2026 and 2030   
Edmond Beina  | 7 December 2018 | —  | 4  | 6  | —  |  |  |  |  | Not in ICC custody  |   
Maxime Mokom | 10 December 2018 | —  | 9  | 13  | —  | _14 March 2022_  
22 March 2022 | _22–24 August 2023_ |  | **Proceedings finished** with charges withdrawn  |   
Mahamat Said Abdel Kani | 7 January 2019 | —  | 8  | 6  | —  | _24 January 2021_  
28–29 January 2021 | _12–14 October 2022_  
confirmed  
9 December 2021 | _26 September 2022 –_ |  | In ICC custody, charges confirmed, trial before Trial-Chamber VI ongoing  |   
Noureddine Adam | 7 January 2019 | —  | 5  | 1  | —  |  |  |  |  | Not in ICC custody  |   
Georgia  
Investigation article | Mikhail Mindzaev | 24 June 2022 | —  | —  | 5  | —  |  |  |  |  | Not in ICC custody  |   
Gamlet Guchmazov  | —  | —  | 5  | —  |  |  |  |  | Not in ICC custody   
David Sanakoev | —  | —  | 2  | —  |  |  |  |  | Not in ICC custody   
Burundi |  | Investigation initiated  |   
Bangladesh/Myanmar  
Investigation article |  | Investigation initiated  |   
Afghanistan  
Investigation article | Haibatullah Akhundzada | 8 July 2025 | —  | 1  | —  | —  |  |  |  |  | Not in ICC custody  |   
Abdul Hakim Haqqani | —  | 1  | —  | —  |  |  |  |  | Not in ICC custody   
Palestine  
Investigation article  
Arrest warrants article | Mohammed Deif | 21 November 2024 | —  | 5  | 3  | —  |  | **Proceedings finished** due to death  |   
Yoav Gallant | 21 November 2024 | —  | 3  | 4  | —  |  |  |  |  | Not in ICC custody  |   
Benjamin Netanyahu | —  | 3  | 4  | —  |  |  |  |  | Not in ICC custody   
Philippines  
Investigation article | Rodrigo Duterte | 7 March 2025 | —  | 1  | —  | —  | _12 March 2025_  
14 March 2025 | _scheduled to begin 23 September 2025_ |  |  | In ICC custody, confirmation of charges hearing scheduled  |   
Venezuela I  
Investigation article |  | Investigation initiated  |   
Ukraine  
Investigation article  
Arrest warrants article | Vladimir Putin | 17 March 2023 | —  | —  | 2  | —  |  |  |  |  | Not in ICC custody  |   
Maria Lvova-Belova | —  | —  | 2  | —  |  |  |  |  | Not in ICC custody   
Viktor Sokolov | 5 March 2024 | —  | 1  | 2  | —  |  |  |  |  | Not in ICC custody  |   
Sergey Kobylash | —  | 1  | 2  | —  |  |  |  |  | Not in ICC custody   
Sergei Shoigu | 24 June 2024 | —  | 1  | 2  | —  |  |  |  |  | Not in ICC custody  |   
Valery Gerasimov | —  | 1  | 2  | —  |  |  |  |  | Not in ICC custody   
  
**Notes**

  1. **^** A situation is listed here if the Prosecutor of the Court has opened an investigation.
  2. **^** Obviously, only persons who are publicly indicted are listed. The Court can issue an indictment under seal.
  3. **^** If not otherwise noted, the indicted is wanted by warrant of arrest.
  4. **^** If there was a warrant of arrest, the dates of transfer to the International Criminal Court (_in italics_) and of the initial appearance are given. In case of a summons to appear, only the date of the initial appearance is given.
  5. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ According to Article 61 (8) of the Rome Statute, "where the Pre-Trial Chamber declines to confirm a charge, the Prosecutor shall not be precluded from subsequently requesting its confirmation if the request is supported by additional evidence."

## Relationships

### United Nations

The UN Security Council referred the situation in Darfur to the ICC in 2005.

Unlike the International Court of Justice, the ICC is legally independent from
the United Nations. The Rome Statute grants certain powers to the United
Nations Security Council, which limit its functional independence. Article 13
allows the Security Council to refer to the Court situations that would not
otherwise fall under the Court's jurisdiction (as it did in relation to the
situations in Darfur and Libya, which the Court could not otherwise have
prosecuted as neither Sudan nor Libya are state parties). Article 16 allows
the Security Council to require the Court to defer from investigating a case
for a period of twelve months. Such a deferral may be renewed indefinitely by
the Security Council. This sort of an arrangement gives the ICC some of the
advantages inhering in the organs of the United Nations such as using the
enforcement powers of the Security Council, but it also creates a risk of
being tainted with the political controversies of the Security Council.

The Court cooperates with the UN in many different areas, including the
exchange of information and logistical support. The Court reports to the UN
each year on its activities, and some meetings of the Assembly of States
Parties are held at UN facilities. The relationship between the Court and the
UN is governed by a "Relationship Agreement between the International Criminal
Court and the United Nations".

### Nongovernmental organizations

During the 1970s and 1980s, international human rights and humanitarian
Nongovernmental Organizations (or NGOs) began to proliferate at exponential
rates. Concurrently, the quest to find a way to punish international crimes
shifted from being the exclusive responsibility of legal experts to being
shared with international human rights activism.

NGOs helped birth the ICC through advocacy and championing for the prosecution
of perpetrators of crimes against humanity. NGOs closely monitor the
organization's declarations and actions, ensuring that the work that is being
executed on behalf of the ICC is fulfilling its objectives and
responsibilities to civil society. According to Benjamin Schiff, "From the
Statute Conference onward, the relationship between the ICC and the NGOs has
probably been closer, more consistent, and more vital to the Court than have
analogous relations between NGOs and any other international organization."

There are a number of NGOs working on a variety of issues related to the ICC.
The NGO Coalition for the International Criminal Court has served as a sort of
umbrella for NGOs to coordinate with each other on similar objectives related
to the ICC. The CICC has 2,500 member organizations in 150 countries. The
original steering committee included representatives from the World Federalist
Movement, the International Commission of Jurists, Amnesty International, the
Lawyers Committee for Human Rights, Human Rights Watch, Parliamentarians for
Global Action, and No Peace Without Justice. Today, many of the NGOs with
which the ICC cooperates are members of the CICC. These organizations come
from a range of backgrounds, spanning from major international NGOs such as
Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International, to smaller, more local
organizations focused on peace and justice missions. Many work closely with
states, such as the International Criminal Law Network, founded and
predominantly funded by the Hague municipality and the Dutch Ministries of
Defense and Foreign Affairs. The CICC also claims organizations that are
themselves federations, such as the International Federation of Human Rights
Leagues (FIDH).

CICC members subscribe to three principles that permit them to work under the
umbrella of the CICC, so long as their objectives match them:

  * Promoting worldwide ratification and implementation of the Rome Statute of the ICC
  * Maintaining the integrity of the Rome Statute of the ICC, and
  * Ensuring the ICC will be as fair, effective and independent as possible

The NGOs that work under the CICC do not normally pursue agendas exclusive to
the work of the Court, rather they may work for broader causes, such as
general human rights issues, victims' rights, gender rights, rule of law,
conflict mediation, and peace. The CICC coordinates their efforts to improve
the efficiency of NGOs' contributions to the Court and to pool their influence
on major common issues. From the ICC side, it has been useful to have the CICC
channel NGO contacts with the Court so that its officials do not have to
interact individually with thousands of separate organizations.

NGOs have been crucial to the evolution of the ICC, as they assisted in the
creation of the normative climate that urged states to seriously consider the
Court's formation. Their legal experts helped shape the Statute, while their
lobbying efforts built support for it. They advocate Statute ratification
globally and work at expert and political levels within member states for
passage of necessary domestic legislation. NGOs are greatly represented at
meetings for the Assembly of States Parties, and they use the ASP meetings to
press for decisions promoting their priorities. Many of these NGOs have
reasonable access to important officials at the ICC because of their
involvement during the Statute process. They are engaged in monitoring,
commenting upon, and assisting in the ICC's activities.

The ICC often depends on NGOs to interact with local populations. The Registry
Public Information Office personnel and Victims Participation and Reparations
Section officials hold seminars for local leaders, professionals and the media
to spread the word about the Court. These are the kinds of events that are
often hosted or organized by local NGOs. Because there can be challenges with
determining which of these NGOs are legitimate, CICC regional representatives
often have the ability to help screen and identify trustworthy organizations.

NGOs are also "sources of criticism, exhortation and pressure upon" the ICC.
The ICC heavily depends on NGOs for its operations. Although NGOs and states
cannot directly impact the judicial nucleus of the organization, they can
impart information on crimes, can help locate victims and witnesses, and can
promote and organize victim participation. NGOs outwardly comment on the
Court's operations, "push for expansion of its activities especially in the
new justice areas of outreach in conflict areas, in victims' participation and
reparations, and in upholding due-process standards and defense 'equality of
arms' and so implicitly set an agenda for the future evolution of the ICC."
The relatively uninterrupted progression of NGO involvement with the ICC may
mean that NGOs have become repositories of more institutional historical
knowledge about the ICC than its national representatives, and have greater
expertise than some of the organization's employees themselves. While NGOs
look to mold the ICC to satisfy the interests and priorities that they have
worked for since the early 1990s, they unavoidably press against the limits
imposed upon the ICC by the states that are members of the organization. NGOs
can pursue their own mandates, irrespective of whether they are compatible
with those of other NGOs, while the ICC must respond to the complexities of
its own mandate as well as those of the states and NGOs.

Another issue has been that NGOs possess "exaggerated senses of their
ownership over the organization and, having been vital to and successful in
promoting the Court, were not managing to redefine their roles to permit the
Court its necessary independence." Additionally, because there does exist such
a gap between the large human rights organizations and the smaller peace-
oriented organizations, it is difficult for ICC officials to manage and
gratify all of their NGOs. "ICC officials recognize that the NGOs pursue their
own agendas, and that they will seek to pressure the ICC in the direction of
their own priorities rather than necessarily understanding or being fully
sympathetic to the myriad constraints and pressures under which the Court
operates." Both the ICC and the NGO community avoid criticizing each other
publicly or vehemently, although NGOs have released advisory and cautionary
messages regarding the ICC. They avoid taking stances that could potentially
give the Court's adversaries, particularly the U.S., more motive to berate the
organization.

## Criticism and opposition

### African states

In October 2016, after repeated claims that the court was biased against
African states, Burundi, South Africa and the Gambia announced their
withdrawals from the Rome Statute. Following Gambia's presidential election
later that year, which ended the long rule of Yahya Jammeh, Gambia rescinded
its withdrawal notification. A decision by the High Court of South Africa in
early 2017 ruled that the attempted withdrawal was unconstitutional, as it had
not been agreed by Parliament, prompting the South African government to
inform the UN that it was revoking its decision to withdraw.

### African accusations of Western imperialism

Kenyan politician William Ruto in February 2013

The ICC has been accused of bias and as being a tool of Western imperialism,
only punishing leaders from small, weak states while ignoring crimes committed
by richer and more powerful states. This sentiment has been expressed
particularly by African leaders due to an alleged disproportionate focus of
the Court on Africa, while it claims to have a global mandate. Until January
2016, all nine situations which the ICC had been investigating were in African
countries.

African critics have suggested the ICC is acting as a neo-colonial force
seeking to further empower Western political and extractive interests in
Africa. Scholar Awol Allo has described the court's underlying problem that
has led to these challenges with Africa as not overt racism, but Eurocentrism.
Another analysis suggests that African states are motivated by concerns over
Africa's place in world order: the problem is the sovereign inequality
displayed by the ICC prosecutor's focus.

The prosecution of Kenyan Deputy President William Ruto and President Uhuru
Kenyatta (both charged before coming into office) led to the Kenyan parliament
passing a motion calling for Kenya's withdrawal from the ICC, and the country
called on the other 33 African states party to the ICC to withdraw their
support, an issue which was discussed at a special African Union (AU) summit
in October 2013.

Though the ICC has denied the charge of disproportionately targeting African
leaders, and claims to stand up for victims wherever they may be, Kenya was
not alone in criticising the ICC. Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir visited
Kenya, South Africa, China, Nigeria, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates,
Egypt, Ethiopia, Qatar and several other countries despite an outstanding ICC
warrant for his arrest but was not arrested; he said that the charges against
him are "exaggerated" and that the ICC was a part of a "Western plot" against
him. Ivory Coast's government opted not to transfer former first lady Simone
Gbagbo to the court but to instead try her at home. Rwanda's ambassador to the
African Union, Joseph Nsengimana, argued that, "It is not only the case of
Kenya. We have seen international justice become more and more a political
matter." Ugandan President Yoweri Museveni accused the ICC of "mishandling
complex African issues". Ethiopian Prime Minister Hailemariam Desalegn, at the
time AU chairman, told the UN General Assembly at the General debate of the
sixty-eighth session of the United Nations General Assembly: "The manner in
which the ICC has been operating has left a very bad impression in Africa. It
is totally unacceptable."

### African Union (AU) withdrawal proposal

South African President Jacob Zuma said the perceptions of the ICC as
"unreasonable" led to the calling of the special AU summit on 13 October 2015.
Botswana is a notable supporter of the ICC in Africa. At the summit, the AU
did not endorse the proposal for a collective withdrawal from the ICC due to
lack of support for the idea. The summit concluded that serving heads of state
should not be put on trial and that the Kenyan cases should be deferred.
Ethiopian formerly Foreign Minister Tedros Adhanom said: "We have rejected the
double standard that the ICC is applying in dispensing international justice."
Despite these calls, the ICC went ahead with requiring William Ruto to attend
his trial. The UNSC was then asked to consider deferring the trials of
Kenyatta and Ruto for a year, but this was rejected. In November, the ICC's
Assembly of State Parties responded to Kenya's calls for an exemption for
sitting heads of state by agreeing to consider amendments to the Rome Statute
to address the concerns.

On 7 October 2016, Burundi announced that it would leave the ICC, after the
court began investigating political violence in that nation. In the two weeks
that followed, South Africa and The Gambia also announced their intention to
leave the court, with Kenya and Namibia reportedly also considering departure.
All three nations cited the fact that all 39 people indicted by the court over
its history by that date had been African and that the court has made no
effort to investigate war crimes tied to the 2003 invasion of Iraq. Following
The Gambia's presidential election later that year, which ended the long rule
of Yahya Jammeh, the new government rescinded its withdrawal notification. The
High Court of South Africa ruled on 2 February 2017 that the South African
government's notice to withdraw was unconstitutional and invalid. On 7 March
2017 the South African government formally revoked its intention to withdraw.
The ruling ANC revealed on 5 July 2017 that its intention to withdraw stands.

### Israel

In 2020, the +972 magazine, based in Israel, reported political interference
coming from Israel and the U.S. when Fatou Bensouda, the chief prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court, announced that "there is legal basis to
probe Israel and Palestinian groups over war crimes in the West Bank
(including East Jerusalem) and the Gaza Strip, and that her office was ready
to investigate the matter". In 2018, when the Israeli government wanted to
demolish the West Bank village of Khan al Ahmar, Bensouda explicitly warned
Israel that doing so could be considered a ‘war crime’. The Israeli
government's response was to publicly defy the court, describing the
prosecutor's statement as ‘pure anti-Semitism’ in Netanyahu’s words.

_The Guardian_ reported in 2024, on the basis of anonymous sources, that
Israel had conducted a nine-year "war" against the ICC. These sources alleged
that Israeli intelligence agencies were used to "surveil, hack, pressure,
smear and allegedly threaten senior ICC staff in an effort to derail the
court's inquiries." In particular, Yossi Cohen, director of Mossad at the
time, allegedly threatened Bensouda and her family in an attempt to dissuade
her from opening war crime inquiries against Israel. The anonymous sources are
said to be familiar with disclosures Bensouda made to the ICC regarding the
operation.

In November 2024, after the ICC issued an arrest warrant for Israeli prime
minister Benjamin Netanyahu and former defense minister Yoav Gallant on
charges of war crimes and crimes against humanity during the Gaza war,
Netanyahu accused the ICC of antisemitism, while Gallant argued the Court set
"a dangerous precedent against the right to self-defence and ethical warfare
and encourages murderous terrorism." In that same November, Israel appealed
the ICC warrants against Netanyahu and Gallant.

In November 2024, France argued that the arrest warrants for Israeli leaders
are not valid because Israel is not a member of the ICC. In that same month,
then-Prime Minister of Canada, Justin Trudeau, announced that Canada would
abide by the arrest warrants and arrest and deport Netanyahu if he entered
that country. Italian Foreign Minister Antonio Tajani said on various
occasions that Italy would not arrest Prime Minister Netanyahu. In January
2025, Polish prime minister Donald Tusk guaranteed safe passage for senior
Israeli officials, including Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu, to an
event in Poland marking the 80th anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz.
The majority of the Polish public disagreed with the government's decision not
to arrest Netanyahu.

Germany's CDU leader Friedrich Merz criticized the ICC's decision to issue an
arrest warrant for Netanyahu. In February 2025, one day after the 2025 German
federal election, he announced his will to invite Netanyahu to Germany, "as an
open challenge" to the decision of the ICC.

In April 2025, Netanyahu visited Hungary, a state party to the Rome Statute of
the ICC. During the visit, the Hungarian government's prime minister, Viktor
Orbán announced that it would withdraw from the ICC, describing it as
"politically biased". The withdrawal will become effective after one year's
written notice. Hungary will join Israel, the US, Russia, China and North
Korea among nations which do not recognise the ICC's jurisdiction. On May 20,
2025, the Hungarian National Assembly approved a bill to initiate the
country's withdrawal from the International Criminal Court (ICC), marking
Hungary as the first European Union member state to take such action. The
bill, introduced by Deputy Prime Minister Zsolt Semjén, passed with 134 votes
in favor, 37 against, and 7 abstentions. This move has drawn criticism from
human rights organizations and may strain Hungary's relations within the
European Union, where all member states are ICC members.

### Philippines

Following the announcement that the ICC would open a preliminary investigation
on the Philippines in connection to its escalating drug war, President Rodrigo
Duterte announced on 14 March 2018 that the Philippines would start to submit
plans to withdraw, completing the process on 17 March 2019. The ICC pointed
out that it retained jurisdiction over the Philippines during the period when
it was a state party to the Rome Statute, from November 2011 to March 2019.

On 11 March 2025, Duterte was arrested on an ICC warrant pursuant to his role
in the Philippine Drug War and flown from Manila to The Hague.

### Russia

Following speculation whether South Africa would arrest him, Russian president
Vladimir Putin did not attend the 15th BRICS summit in Johannesburg. Russia
was represented by Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov (right).

In March 2023, Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov announced that Russia did
not recognize the Court's decision to issue an arrest warrant for President
Vladimir Putin on account of war crimes in Ukraine and noted that Russia, like
other countries which had not ratified the Rome Statute, did not recognise the
jurisdiction of the ICC, saying "And accordingly, any decisions of this kind
are null and void for the Russian Federation from the point of view of law."

State Duma speaker Vyacheslav Volodin wrote on Telegram, "Yankees, hands off
Putin!" calling the move evidence of Western "hysteria", and saying that "we
regard any attacks on the President of the Russian Federation as aggression
against our country".

South African Foreign Minister Naledi Pandor criticized the ICC for not having
what she called an "evenhanded approach" to all leaders responsible for
violations of international law. South Africa, which failed in its obligation
to arrest visiting Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir in June 2015, invited
Vladimir Putin to the 15th BRICS Summit in Durban. On 19 July 2023, South
Africa announced that "by mutual agreement" Putin would not attend the summit.
Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov attended in Putin's place.

Putin with Mongolian President Ukhnaagiin Khürelsükh in Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia,
3 September 2024

In the months following the arrest warrant for Putin being issued, Russia
issued warrants for the arrest of multiple ICC officials, including the
court's president Piotr Hofmański and its vice-president Luz del Carmen Ibáñez
Carranza.

In advance of a visit by Putin to Mongolia on 3 September 2024, the ICC stated
that Mongolia was obligated to place Putin under arrest, due to Mongolia being
a signatory of the Rome Statute of the ICC. After failure to make the arrest,
Mongolia was described by Ukraine as complicit in Putin's war crimes.
Following the visit and the refusal to arrest Putin, the Mongolia government
said that the issue of energy relations is critical to the country and that
"Mongolia has always maintained a policy of neutrality in all its diplomatic
relations, as demonstrated in our statements of record to date."

### United States

United States president George W. Bush signed the American Service-Members'
Protection Act (informally referred to as _The Hague Invasion Act_) to signify
the United States' opposition to any possible future jurisdiction of the court
or its tribunals. The act gives the President the power to use "all means
necessary and appropriate to bring about the release of any U.S. or allied
personnel being detained or imprisoned by, on behalf of, or at the request of
the International Criminal Court". During the administration of Barack Obama,
U.S. opposition to the ICC evolved to "positive engagement", but no effort was
made to ratify the Rome Statute.

The subsequent Donald Trump administration was considerably more hostile to
the Court, similar to the Bush administration, threatening prosecution and
financial sanctions on ICC judges and staff in U.S. courts as well as imposing
visa bans in response to any investigation against American nationals in
connection to alleged crimes and atrocities perpetrated by the U.S. in
Afghanistan. The threat included sanctions against any of over 120 countries
that have ratified the Court for cooperating in the process. In November 2017,
Fatou Bensouda advised the court to consider seeking charges for human rights
abuses committed during the War in Afghanistan such as alleged rapes and
tortures by the U.S. Armed Forces and the Central Intelligence Agency, crime
against humanity committed by the Taliban, and war crimes committed by the
Afghan National Security Forces. John Bolton, National Security Advisor of the
United States, stated that ICC had no jurisdiction over the U.S., which had
not ratified the Rome Statute. In 2020, overturning the previous decision not
to proceed, senior judges at the ICC authorized an investigation into the
alleged war crimes in Afghanistan.

On 11 June 2020, the United States announced sanctions on officials and
employees, as well as their families, involved in investigating alleged crimes
against humanity committed by U.S. armed forces in Afghanistan. This move was
widely criticized by human rights groups. The U.S. ordered sanctions against
the ICC prosecutor Fatou Bensouda, and the ICC's head of Jurisdiction,
Complementary, and Cooperation Division, Phakiso Mochochok, for an
investigation into alleged war crimes by U.S. forces and the Central
Intelligence Agency (CIA) in Afghanistan since 2003. Attorney General William
Barr said, "The US government has reason to doubt the honesty of the ICC. The
Department of Justice has received substantial credible information that
raises serious concerns about a long history of financial corruption and
malfeasance at the highest levels of the office of the prosecutor". The ICC
responded with a statement expressing "profound regret at the announcement of
further threats and coercive actions." "These attacks constitute an escalation
and an unacceptable attempt to interfere with the rule of law and the Court's
judicial proceedings", the statement said. "They are announced with the
declared aim of influencing the actions of ICC officials in the context of the
court's independent and objective investigations and impartial judicial
proceedings."

On 30 September 2020, prominent United States human rights lawyers announced
that they would sue Trump and his Administration—including Barr, Secretary of
State Mike Pompeo, Treasury secretary Steven Mnuchin, and OFAC director Andrea
Gacki, and the departments they head—on the grounds that Trump's Executive
Order 13928 order had gagged them, violating their right to free speech and
impeding their work in trying to obtain justice on behalf of victims of war
crimes. One of the plaintiffs, Diane Marie Amann, stated that, as a result of
sanctions against the chief prosecutor at the ICC, she herself risked having
her family assets seized if she continued to work for children who are bought
and sold by traffickers, killed, tortured, sexually abused and forced to
become child soldiers.

On 4 January 2021, U.S. District Judge Katherine Polk Failla in New York City
issued a preliminary injunction against the Trump administration from imposing
criminal or civil penalties against ICC personnel and those who support the
court's work, including the plaintiffs. The sanctions were subsequently lifted
by the Biden administration Secretary of State Antony Blinken in April 2021.

In 2023, the Biden administration welcomed the issuing of an ICC arrest
warrant for Russian President Vladimir Putin. President Joe Biden said that
the issuing of the warrant "makes a very strong point". In 2024, the Biden
administration opposed an arrest warrant for Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu over alleged Israeli war crimes committed during the Gaza war in the
Gaza Strip. Biden denounced Netanyahu's arrest warrant as "outrageous."
Secretary of State Antony Blinken said the Biden administration would work
with the US Congress on potential sanctions against the ICC. Prior to the
issuing of the ICC's arrest warrant for Netanyahu, a group of US Republican
senators sent a letter to ICC prosecutor Karim Ahmad Khan that contained the
warning "Target Israel and we will target you. If you move forward ... we will
move to end all American support for the ICC, sanction your employees and
associates, and bar you and your families from the United States. You have
been warned." The U.S. House of Representatives passed a bill to sanction ICC
officials on 4 June 2024.

US President Donald Trump and Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu at the White
House, 4 February 2025

On 9 January 2025, the U.S. House of Representatives passed the _Illegitimate
Court Counteraction Act_ by 243–140 to sanction the ICC in protest at its
arrest warrants for Netanyahu and Gallant issued in November 2024. On 6
February 2025, U.S. President Donald Trump signed an executive order imposing
economic and travel sanctions on individuals involved in ICC investigations
targeting U.S. citizens and allies, notably Israel. This action coincided with
Netanyahu visiting Washington. The sanctions entail freezing U.S. assets of
designated individuals and prohibiting their entry into the United States.
This move mirrors a similar stance taken during Trump's first term, when
sanctions were applied to ICC officials over investigations into alleged war
crimes by U.S. forces in Afghanistan.

On 5 June 2025 the United States Department of State sanctioned four ICC
judges—Solomy Balungi Bossa of Uganda, Luz del Carmen Ibáñez Carranza of Peru,
Reine Adelaide Sophie Alapini Gansou of Benin, and Beti Hohler of
Slovenia—under President Trump’s Executive Order 14203, “Imposing Sanctions on
the International Criminal Court.” The four judges were accused of engaging in
efforts "to investigate, arrest, detain, or prosecute a protected person
without consent of that person’s country of nationality"— viz, of the United
States or Israel. The sanctions effectively block those individuals' property
interests and all other beneficial financial transactions within the United
States.

#### U.S. criticisms

The United States Department of State argues that there are "insufficient
checks and balances on the authority of the ICC prosecutor and judges" and
"insufficient protection against politicized prosecutions or other abuses".
The current law in the United States on the ICC is the _American Service-
Members' Protection Act_ (ASPA), 116 Stat. 820. The ASPA authorizes the
President of the United States to use "all means necessary and appropriate to
bring about the release of any U.S. or allied personnel being detained or
imprisoned by, on behalf of, or at the request of the International Criminal
Court". This authorization has led the act to be nicknamed the "Hague Invasion
Act", because the freeing of U.S. citizens by force might be possible only
through military action.

On 10 September 2018, John R. Bolton, in his first major address as U.S.
National Security Advisor, reiterated that the ICC lacks checks and balances,
exercises "jurisdiction over crimes that have disputed and ambiguous
definitions", and has failed to "deter and punish atrocity crimes". The ICC,
Bolton said, was "superfluous", given that "domestic judicial systems already
hold American citizens to the highest legal and ethical standards". He added
that the U.S. would do everything "to protect our citizens" should the ICC
attempt to prosecute U.S. servicemen over alleged detainee abuse in
Afghanistan. In that event, ICC judges and prosecutors would be barred from
entering the U.S., their funds in the U.S. would be sanctioned and the U.S.
"will prosecute them in the U.S. criminal system. We will do the same for any
company or state that assists an ICC investigation of Americans", Bolton said.
He also criticized Palestinian efforts to bring Israel before the ICC over
allegations of human rights abuses in the West Bank and Gaza.

### United Kingdom

Media revealed that the British government secretly threatened to withdraw
funding from the ICC and withdraw from it if it issued arrest warrants for
Israeli leaders. David Cameron, Minister of Foreign Affairs in Rishi Sunak's
government, made this threat in April 2024 during a heated phone call with
Karim Khan, the British prosecutor at the court.

### Office of Public Counsel for the Defence

Concerning the independent Office of Public Counsel for the Defence (OPCD),
Thomas Lubanga's defence team say they were given a smaller budget than the
Prosecutor and that evidence and witness statements were slow to arrive.

### Impartiality

The International Criminal Court is often "critiqued for being selective, or
imperialistic, or reflecting the geopolitical interests of powerful states,"
says Sarah Knuckey, a Columbia law professor. While many Western countries
supported the arrest warrant for Russian President Putin, how they respond to
the warrant against Israel's Netanyahu will be "a test of the genuineness of
their commitment to international justice for all", she continued.

Human Rights Watch (HRW) reported that the ICC's prosecutor team takes no
account of the roles played by the government in the conflict of Uganda,
Rwanda or Congo. This led to a flawed investigation, because the ICC did not
reach the conclusion of its verdict after considering the governments'
position and actions in the conflict.

### Unintentional consequences

Research indicates that prosecutions of leaders who are culpable of
international crimes in the ICC makes them less likely to peacefully step
down, which can prolong conflicts and incentivize them to make continued use
of mass violence. It is also argued that there is little evidence that
international criminal prosecution practically fosters peace: "the ICC has
been used as a means of intervention in ongoing conflicts with the expectation
that the indictments, arrests, and trials of elite perpetrators have
deterrence and preventive effects for atrocity crimes. Despite these
legitimate intentions and great expectations, there is little evidence of the
efficacy of justice as a means to peace".

### State cooperation

That the ICC cannot mount successful cases without state cooperation is
problematic for several reasons. It means that the ICC acts inconsistently in
its selection of cases, is prevented from taking on hard cases and loses
legitimacy. It also gives the ICC less deterrent value, as potential
perpetrators of war crimes know that they can avoid ICC judgment by taking
over government and refusing to cooperate.

### Principle of complementarity

The Rome Statute's principle of complementarity (that the Court will only
prosecute if states are unwilling or unable to) is often taken for granted in
the legal analysis of international criminal law and its jurisprudence.
Initially the thorny issue of the actual application of the complementarity
principle arose in 2008, when William Schabas published his influential
paper.[_clarification needed_] No substantive research was made by other
scholars on this issue for quite some time. In June 2017, Victor Tsilonis
advanced the same criticism which is reinforced by events, practices of the
Office of the Prosecutor and ICC cases in the Essays in Honour of Nestor
Courakis. His paper essentially argues that the Αl‐Senussi case arguably is
the first instance of the complementarity principle's actual implementation
eleven whole years after the ratification of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court.

On the other hand, in 2017, Chief Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda invoked the
principle of complementarity in the situation between Russia and Georgia in
the Ossetia region. Moreover, following the threats of certain African states
(initially Burundi, Gambia and South Africa) to withdraw their ratifications,
Bensouda again referred to the principle of complementarity as a core
principle of ICC's jurisdiction and has more extensively focused on the
principle's application on the latest Office of The Prosecutor's Report on
Preliminary Examination Activities 2016.

Some advocates have suggested that the ICC go "beyond complementarity" and
systematically support national capacity for prosecutions. They argue that
national prosecutions, where possible, are more cost-effective, preferable to
victims and more sustainable.

### Jurisdiction over corporations

There is a debate on whether the ICC should have jurisdiction over
corporations that violate international law. Supporters argue that
corporations can and do commit human rights violations, such as war crimes
linked to raw materials in conflict zones. Critics argue that prosecuting
corporations would compromise the principle of complementarity, that it would
give corporations excessive power under international law, or that it would
compromise voluntary initiatives by companies. John Ruggie has argued that
jurisdiction of corporations under international law should be limited to
international crimes, while Nicolás Carrillo-Santarelli of La Sabana
University argues that it should cover all human rights violations.

Despite its lack of jurisdiction, the ICC announced in 2016 that it would
prioritize criminal cases linked to land grabbing, illegal resource
extraction, or environmental degradation caused by corporate activity. The
proposed crime of ecocide would have jurisdiction over corporations as well as
governments. Supporters of criminalizing ecocide argue that it would shift the
ICC's priorities away from Africa, since most environmental degradation is
caused by states and corporations in the Global North.[_failed verification –
see discussion_]