1994 court of the United Nations Security Council

| This article **needs attention from an expert in law**. The specific problem
is: **Multiple issues, especially related to factual details; legal status
needs expansion.** WikiProject Law may be able to help recruit an expert. _(
June 2025)_  
---|---  
Human skulls at the  
Nyamata Genocide Memorial Centre  
---  
Part of a series on the  
Rwandan genocide  
Background

  * History of Rwanda
  * Origins of Hutu, Tutsi and Twa
  * Kingdom of Rwanda
  * Rwandan Revolution
  * Rwandan Civil War
  * Hutu Power
  * Assassination of  
Habyarimana and Ntaryamira

  
Events

  * Initial events
  * Chronology
  * Gikondo massacre
  * Musha Church massacre
  * Nyarubuye massacre

  
Parties responsible

  * People indicted by the  
International Criminal Tribunal

  * Genocidaires
  * Akazu
  * Impuzamugambi militia
  * Interahamwe militia
  * _Kangura_
  * RTLM radio

  
Response

  * Rwandan Patriotic Front
  * International community
  * United Nations Mission
  * UN Security Council  
Resolution 935

  * Opération "Turquoise"

  
Aftermath

  * Great Lakes refugee crisis
  * Gacaca court
  * First Congo War
  * (Massacres of Hutus)
  * Second Congo War

  
Resources

  * Bibliography
  * Filmography

  
  
  * v
  * t
  * e

  
  
The **International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda** (**ICTR** ; French:
_Tribunal pénal international pour le Rwanda_ ; Kinyarwanda: _Urukiko
Mpanabyaha Mpuzamahanga Rwashyiriweho u Rwanda_) was an international _ad-hoc_
court established in November 1994 by the United Nations Security Council in
Resolution 955 in order to adjudicate people charged for the Rwandan genocide
and other serious violations of international law in Rwanda, or by Rwandan
citizens in nearby states, between 1 January and 31 December 1994. The court
eventually convicted 61 individuals and acquitted 14. In 1995, it became
located in Arusha, Tanzania, under Resolution 977. From 2006, Arusha also
became the location of the African Court on Human and Peoples' Rights. In 1998
the operation of the tribunal was expanded in Resolution 1165. Through several
resolutions, the Security Council called on the tribunal to complete its
investigations by end of 2004, complete all trial activities by end of 2008,
and complete all work in 2012. The tribunal had jurisdiction over genocide,
crimes against humanity, and violations of Common Article Three and Additional
Protocol II of the Geneva Conventions (which deals with internal conflicts).

The first trial, of Jean-Paul Akayesu, began in 1997. Jean Kambanda, interim
Prime Minister, pleaded guilty. According to the ICTR's Completion Strategy,
in accordance with Security Council Resolution 1503, all first-instance cases
were to have completed trial by the end of 2008 (this date was later extended
to the end of 2009) and all work was to be completed by 2010. As of 2009, the
tribunal had finished 50 trials and convicted 29 accused persons, and another
11 trials were in progress and 14 individuals were awaiting trial in
detention; but the prosecutor intended to transfer 5 to national jurisdiction
for trial. 13 others were still at large, some suspected to be dead. The
United Nations Security Council called upon the tribunal to finish its work by
31 December 2014 to prepare for its closure and transfer of its
responsibilities to the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals (IRMCT or Mechanism) which had begun functioning for the ICTR branch
on 1 July 2012. The Tribunal was officially closed on 31 December 2015.

The tribunal's failure to prosecute war crimes committed by the Rwandan
Patriotic Front or try RPF leader Paul Kagame was widely criticized, to the
point of being characterized as "victor's justice".[_excessive citations_]

## The Rwandan genocide

The Rwandan genocide refers to the mass slaughter of more than 800,000 ethnic
Tutsi and politically moderate Hutu by government-directed gangs of Hutu
extremist soldiers and police in Rwanda. The duration of the 1994 genocide is
usually described as 100 days, beginning on April 6 and ending in mid-July.

Photographs of genocide victims displayed at the Genocide Memorial Center in
Kigali

The tension between the majority Hutu and the minority Tutsi had developed
over time but was particularly emphasized late in the nineteenth century and
early in the twentieth century as a result of German and Belgian colonialism
over Rwanda. The ethnic categorization of the two was an imposed and an
arbitrary construct based more on physical characteristics than ethnic
background. However, the social differences between the Hutu and the Tutsi
have traditionally allowed the Tutsi, with a strong pastoralist tradition, to
gain social, economic, and political ascendancy over the Hutu, who were
primarily agriculturalists. The distinction under colonial powers allowed
Tutsis to establish ruling power until a Hutu revolution in 1959 abolished the
Tutsi monarchy by 1961.

The hostility between the two groups continued, as "additional rounds of
ethnic tension and violence flared periodically and led to mass killings of
Tutsi in Rwanda, such as in 1963, 1967, and 1973". The establishment of the
Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF) and its invasion from Uganda furthered ethnic
hatred. A ceasefire in these hostilities led to negotiations between the
government and the RPF in 1992.

On April 6, 1994, a plane carrying then-President Juvenal Habyarimana, and
Cyprien Ntaryamira of Burundi was shot down, killing everyone on board. The
Hutu held the RPF accountable and immediately began the genocide, targeted at
both Tutsis and Hutu moderates.

Most of the killing during the Rwandan genocide was carried out by the radical
Hutu groups known as the Interahamwe and the Impuzamugambi. Radio broadcasts
also were an integral part of the genocide, which further fueled the genocide
by encouraging Hutu civilians to kill their Tutsi neighbours, labeled as
"cockroaches" in need of extermination. Despite its colossal scale,
particularly within such a short period of time, the genocide was carried out
almost entirely by hand, usually with the utilization of machetes and clubs.
Various atrocities committed include the rape of thousands of Tutsi women, as
well as the dismemberment and disfigurement of victims. Frequently the killers
were people the victims knew personally—neighbors, workmates, former friends,
sometimes even relatives through marriage. At least 500,000 Tutsis were
killed, and approximately 2 million refugees (mostly Hutus) left for refugee
camps of neighboring Burundi, Tanzania, Uganda, and former Zaire.

## Establishment of the ICTR

The United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda is regarded as a major
failure. The international response to the Rwandan genocide was poor. For
weeks, the major power nations denied that a genocide was taking place in
Rwanda. The United States refused to call the incident _genocide_ because
using the term would make an obligation for the United States to send troops,
which it was reluctant to do after several of its soldiers were killed during
a humanitarian mission in Somalia the previous year. Finally in July 1994,
after the genocide was over, the UN Security Council called for an
investigation of the events, and acted to establish an international criminal
tribunal to prosecute those individuals most responsible for the genocide.
Adopting Resolution 955, the Security Council created the ICTR on 8 November
1994 and the ICTR would also deal with other crimes against international
humanitarian law committed on the territory of Rwanda and neighboring states
between 1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994.

## ICTR structure

An ICTR building in Kigali, Rwanda.

The tribunal consisted of 16 judges in four "chambers" – three to hear trials,
and one to hear appeals. In addition, there were 9 _ad litem_ judges, making
25 in all. All 9 _ad litem_ judges were assigned to Chambers II and III. There
was an additional pool of 9 further _ad literim_ judges who would be called on
in the case of a judge being absent.

The column denoted by **#** indicates the order of precedence.

### Trial Chamber I

# | Judge | Country | Status   
---|---|---|---  
19. | Mparany Rajohnson |  Madagascar | Member (_ad litem_ judge)   
  
### Trial Chamber II

# | Judge | Country | Status   
---|---|---|---  
4. | William Sekule |  Tanzania | Presiding judge   
14. | Solomy Balungi Bossa |  Uganda | Member (_ad litem_ judge)   
15. | Lee Gacugia Muthoga |  Kenya | Member (_ad litem_ judge)   
16. | Seon Ki Park |  South Korea | Member (_ad litem_ judge)   
  
### Trial Chamber III

# | Judge | Country | Status   
---|---|---|---  
1. | Vagn Joensen |  Denmark | President ICTR, presiding judge   
2. | Florence Rita Arrey |  Cameroon | Vice-president ICTR, member   
17. | Gberdao Gustave Kam |  Burkina Faso | Member (_ad litem_ judge)   
13. | Bakhtiyar R.Tuzmukhamedov |  Russia | Member   
18. | Robert Fremr |  Czech Republic | Member   
  
### Appeals Chamber

# | Judge | Country | Status   
---|---|---|---  
3. | Theodor Meron |  United States | Presiding judge   
5. | Patrick Robinson |  Jamaica | Member   
7. | Fausto Pocar |  Italy | Member   
8. | Liu Daqun |  China | Member   
6. | Mehmet Güney |  Turkey | Member   
11. | Carmel Agius |  Malta | Member   
9. | Arlette Ramaroson |  Madagascar | Member   
10. | Andrésia Vaz |  Senegal | Member   
12. | Khalida Rashid Khan |  Pakistan | Member   
  
### Office of the Prosecutor

Offices of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda in Arusha, 2003.

The Office of the Prosecutor was divided into various units at the height of
its activity, including the Investigations Division and the Prosecution
Division:

  * The Prosecution Division was responsible for prosecuting all cases before the Tribunal. Headed by a Chief of Prosecutions.
  * The Investigations Division was responsible for collecting evidence implicating individuals in crimes committed in Rwanda in 1994. Headed by a Chief of Investigations.

#### Prosecutors

  * Richard Goldstone, late 1994 to 30 September 1996 (by virtue of Resolution 936)
  * Louise Arbour, 1 October 1996 to 15 September 1999 (Resolution 1047)
  * Carla Del Ponte, 15 September 1999 to 14 September 2003 (Resolution 1259)
  * Hassan Bubacar Jallow, 15 September 2003 to 31 December 2015 (Resolution 1505)

### The Registry

The Registry was responsible for the overall administration and management of
the ICTR. It also performed other legal functions assigned to it by the
Tribunal's Rules of Procedure and Evidence, and was the Tribunal's channel of
communication.

The Registry was headed by the Registrar, who was the Representative of the UN
Secretary-General. Bongani Christopher Majola of South Africa was Registrar.
after January 2013.

## The Case of Jean-Paul Akayesu

After an intense and precisely targeted campaign of a number of international
non-governmental organizations, which aimed at raising awareness of gendered
violence at the ICTR, the trial of Jean-Paul Akayesu established the legal
precedent that genocidal rape falls within the act of genocide. "...the
[Trial] Chamber finds that in most cases, the rapes of Tutsi women in Taba,
were accompanied with the intent to kill those women. ... In this respect, it
appears clearly to the chamber that the acts of rape and sexual violence, as
other acts of serious bodily and mental harm committed against the Tutsi,
reflected the determination to make Tutsi women suffer and to mutilate them
even before killing them, the intent being to destroy the Tutsi group while
inflicting acute suffering on its members in the process." Presiding judge
Navanethem Pillay said in a statement after the verdict: "From time
immemorial, rape has been regarded as spoils of war. Now it will be considered
a war crime. We want to send out a strong message that rape is no longer a
trophy of war."

## Media Case

The trial against "hate media" began on 23 October 2000. It was charged with
the prosecution of the media which encouraged the genocide of 1994.

On 19 August 2003, at the tribunal in Arusha, life sentences were requested
for Ferdinand Nahimana, and Jean-Bosco Barayagwiza, persons in charge for the
Radio Télévision Libre des Mille Collines, as well as Hassan Ngeze, director
and editor of the _Kangura_ newspaper. They were charged with genocide,
incitement to genocide, and crimes against humanity, before and during the
period of the genocides of 1994. On 3 December 2003, the court found all three
defendants guilty and sentenced Nahimana and Ngeze to life imprisonment and
Barayagwiza to imprisonment for 35 years. On 28 November 2007, the Appeals
Chamber partially allowed appeals against conviction from all three men,
reducing their sentences to 30 years' imprisonment for Nahimana, 32 years'
imprisonment for Barayagwiza and 35 years' imprisonment for Ngeze.

## Related legal activities

French investigating magistrate Jean-Louis Bruguière was also pursuing a case
against the current President, Paul Kagame, and other members of his
administration, for the assassination of his predecessor. This case was under
the regular jurisdiction of the French courts because French citizens were
also killed in the plane crash. The majority of genocide cases were handled by
the so-called gacaca courts, a modernized customary dispute resolution
mechanism.

## Indictees

The ICTR indicted a total of 96 individuals. The proceedings against one
individual are suspended before the IRMCT. The ICTR (or the IRMCT as its
successor) convicted 61 individuals: 25 of whom are currently serving
sentences, 22 of whom have completed their sentences, and 14 of whom died
while serving their sentences. The Tribunal acquitted 14 individuals and
transferred the cases against 10 individuals to national jurisdictions.
Proceedings against nine individuals ended before a final judgment was
rendered: two of whom had their charges dismissed by the Tribunal, two of whom
had their charges withdrawn by the Prosecutor, and five of whom died.

## Controversies

The critique concerning the ICTR can be divided into claims pertaining to its
creation, the fairness of its prosecution (who was accused and whom the
prosecution failed to accuse although it should have issued indictments),
trial fairness (who was sentenced, who was accused and whom the chambers
failed to sentence or acquit although they should have done so) and the
fairness of the procedures (did the parties have equal rights and equal
opportunities to bring their evidence and arguments) and the court’s
efficiency (how much time and resources did the court use to achieve its aims
– and did it achieve these aims).

The legal doubts about the UN Security Council having the power to create a
court which have been levelled against the ICTY’s creation are also valid
regarding the ICTR. And just like the Yugoslav Tribunal, the ICTR had its
jurisdictional blind spots: because its timely jurisdiction was limited to the
year 1994, it could not prosecute later events like the violent dissolution of
the Kibeho refugee camp or the crimes committed against the civilian
population in Zaire (later the Democratic Republic of the Congo) by Hutu
militias, the RPA and Rwandan-backed Congolese rebels. Formally, the
territorial jurisdiction extended to Rwanda’s neighbors, however the ICTR
never investigated the role of Uganda or Zaire in the conflict. Neither did it
investigate failures, shortcomings or possible crimes by politicians from
Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, the UK and the US who were engaged in
negotiations with the Rwandan government before the genocide, in den Arusha
peace process and in attempts to react to the ongoing genocide after April
1994.

Opposite to the ICTY, the ICTR did not have to work in a strongly polarized
ethnic environment. After the Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF) had taken over the
power in Rwanda and the Hutu militias (and the majority of the Hutu
population) had fled to neighboring countries, the perspective of the victims
(the Tutsi inside the country or “Tutsi de l’interieur”) and the liberators
(the Rwandan Patriotic Front which included Tutsi but also many of the Hutu
opponents to president Habyarimana and members of democratic Hutu parties)
prevailed and strongly influence the way, ICTR staff interpreted the conflict.
Attempts by indictees and lawyers who sided with their point of view to
influence the ICTR were mostly unsuccessful, although much more belligerent
and radical than politically motivated defense strategies at the ICTY. The
ICTR was heavily dependent on access to witnesses from Rwanda, to access to
documents and to the cooperation with the Rwandan government, because the UN
Security Council had established the ICTR’s main seat in Arusha rather than in
Rwanda. There also was competition between the Rwandan government and the ICTR
Office of the Prosecution over access to suspects in third countries which
often led to frictions and tensions. According to opinion polls, the Rwandan
population was not very impressed by the ICTR’s efforts, first, because
suspects had rather comfortable conditions in Arusha and did not face capital
punishment, second because the trials there lasted much longer than the
relatively swift and harsh trials Rwanda organized for many of lower ranking
perpetrators. Some of the more prominent ones were even publicly executed in
Kigali.

A widely shared and very basic bias allegation against the ICTR consists in
its failure to investigate and prosecute crimes committed by the Rwandan
Patriotic Army, the armed wing of the RPA. In the light of human rights
organizations’ reports, the RPA had committed war crimes against the civilian
population during its campaign in 1993 and after entering the country at the
beginning of the genocide. There had been looting of private property and
exactions against villagers but also revenge killings, among them the murder
of several high-ranking catholic clerics in Kabgayi in 1994. The latter was
subject of a domestic trial against RPA soldiers and officers, while the
exactions from 1993 and early 1994 were not investigated. There is also a
lasting controversy if the ICTR prosecution should have investigated and tried
the assassination of president Habyarimana. The assault on his aircraft was
later investigated by the French judiciary and there are several (mutually
contradictory) reports about the assassination and its authors (which also
included the French crew members as victims giving the French judiciary a
legal basis for investigations), blaming either Hutu nationalist radicals who
wanted to get rid of the president or the RPF.

For a long time (until the 2010s) neither prosecution nor chambers regarded it
as the ICTR’s job to prosecute contempt of court and false testimonies
committed by witnesses. Their hesitance created incentives for the creation
and expansion of perjurer networks and the creation of false evidence by
either people, who wanted to see an accused sentenced (if he or she came from
an enemy group) or acquitted (if he or she stemmed from their own ethnic
background). Chambers regarded the prosecution of false testimony in court as
being outside their core mandate and made contradictory decisions about who
should prevent false testimony (the prosecution or the chambers) and how.
Instead of initiating sanctions against perjurers, judges were eager to
“explain false testimony away” as examples of cultural exceptions or
trauma.[_page needed_]

Efficiency:

ICTR publications usually measure efficiency in terms of the part of indicted
persons who were put on trial. From that perspective, the ICTR was quite
efficient, because it managed to get hold on all the persons for which it had
issued arrest warrants. But alike the ICTY, the ICTR did not indict all people
which it was tasked and empower to prosecute, because some of the Interahamwe
leaders obtained the status of protected witnesses and a new identity
(Cruvellier). Félicien Kabuga, a wealthy businessman from the Habyarimana era,
who is widely believed to have financed the Interahamwe and provided them with
machetes from China, managed to stay in hiding until his arrest in Paris in
2020. His trial started, but later was first interrupted and then terminated
due to his dementia and inability to stand trial.

ICTR trials used to be very long and cumbersome. In some cases (André
Rwamakuba), the trial chamber struck down the indictment after the prosecution
had rested its case, because there was literally no case to answer to for the
defense. But at that time, the accused had already spent years in custody for
which they were (due to the UN’s immunity) not eligible for any compensation.
In another, the Office of the Prosecutor first summoned the former head of the
Gendarmerie, Augustin Ndindiliyimana (who had feld to Belgium) as a witness
and, when he refused to testify for the prosecution, indicted him.
Ndindiliyimana was first found guilty and sentenced to exactly the same prison
term that he had spent in pre-trial arrest and then exonerated and set free by
the appeals chamber. For years he leaved with other acquitted suspects in a
safe house in Tanzania, because the ICTR was unable to find a country that
would issue him a long-term visa.

Bachmann and Fatic have argued that due to its dependence on Rwanda, the ICTR
became a part of the Rwandan justice system, with the Rwandan government
steering tribunal decisions almost at will, by either holding back evidence or
channeling materials from survivor organizations into judicial procedures.
According to Del Ponte, the Rwandan military intelligence eavesdropped on the
prosecution to retrieve information about secret investigations concerning
RPA-crimes. After pressure from Rwanda, the UK and the US, Del Ponte lost her
position at the ICTR but was allowed to remain ICTY chief prosecutor. The
Office of the Prosecutor never returned to the investigation concerning the
downing of Habyarimana’s Falcon and the secret investigations.