Multilateral development financing institution located in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia

The **Islamic Development Bank** (Arabic: البنك الإسلامي للتنمية, abbreviated
as **IsDB**) is a multilateral development finance institution that is focused
on Islamic finance for infrastructure development and located in Jeddah, Saudi
Arabia. There are 57 shareholding member states with the largest single
shareholder being Saudi Arabia.

## History

It was founded in 1973 by the Finance Ministers at the first Organisation of
the Islamic Conference (now called the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation)
with the support of the King of Saudi Arabia at the time (Faisal), and began
its activities on 3 April 1975.

On 22 May 2013, IsDB tripled its authorized capital to $150 billion to better
serve Muslims in member and non-member countries. The Bank has received credit
ratings of AAA from Standard & Poor's, Moody's, and Fitch. Saudi Arabia holds
about one quarter of the bank's paid up capital. The IDB is an observer at the
United Nations General Assembly.

## Membership

The present membership of the Bank consists of 57 countries. The basic
condition for membership is that the prospective member country should be a
member of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC), pay its contribution
to the capital of the Bank and be willing to accept such terms and conditions
as may be decided upon by the IsDB Board of Governors.

IDB Major Shareholders as at 30 Dhul Hijjah 1432H (25 November 2011)

Ranked on the basis of paid-up capital (as of May 2024), major shareholders
include:

  1. Saudi Arabia (22.5%)
  2. Libya (9.03%)
  3. Indonesia (7.94%)
  4. Iran (7.90%)
  5. Nigeria (7.33%)
  6. Qatar (6.87%)
  7. Egypt (6.77%)
  8. Kuwait (6.62%)
  9. United Arab Emirates (6.48%)
  10. Turkey (6.17%)

## Structure

Country Membership in the Entities of IsDB Group [1]

IDB has evolved into a group of five entities, consisting of Islamic
Development Bank (IsDB), Islamic Development Bank Institute (IsDBI), Islamic
Corporation for Development of the Private Sector (ICD), Islamic Corporation
for Insurance of Investment and Export Credit (ICIEC) and International
Islamic Trade Finance Corporation (ITFC).

## Activities

IDB Group is engaged in a wide range of specialized and integrated activities
such as:

  * Project financing in the public and private sectors;
  * Development assistance for poverty alleviation;
  * Technical assistance for capacity-building;
  * Economic and trade cooperation among member countries;
  * Trade financing;
  * SME financing;
  * Resource mobilization;
  * Direct equity investment in Islamic financial institutions;
  * Insurance and reinsurance coverage for investment and export credit;
  * Research and training programs in Islamic economics and banking;
  * Awqaf investment and financing;
  * Special assistance and scholarships for member countries and Muslim communities in non-member countries;
  * Emergency relief; and
  * Advisory services for public and private entities in member countries.

### Projects and programs

  * **The Gao Bridge in Mali:** Until a few years ago, crossing the Niger River at Gao was done by a ferry that might or might not be operating. This hindered progress and discouraged trade. The Gao Bridge financed by the IDB connected the once isolated Gao Region in eastern Mali to the heartland.