Organization

The **Korean Peninsula Energy Development Organization** (**KEDO**) was an
organization founded on March 15, 1995, by the United States, South Korea, and
Japan to implement the 1994 U.S.-North Korea Agreed Framework that froze North
Korea's indigenous nuclear power plant development centered at the Yongbyon
Nuclear Scientific Research Center, that was suspected of being a step in a
nuclear weapons program. KEDO's principal activity was to construct two light
water reactor nuclear power plants in North Korea to replace North Korea's
Magnox type reactors. The original target year for completion was 2003.

Since then, other members joined:

  * 1995: Australia, Canada, New Zealand
  * 1996: Argentina, Chile, Indonesia
  * 1997: European Union, Poland
  * 1999: Czech Republic
  * 2000: Uzbekistan

KEDO discussions took place at the level of a U.S. Assistant Secretary of
State, South Korea's deputy foreign minister, and the head of the Asian bureau
of Japan's Foreign Ministry.

The KEDO Secretariat was located in New York. KEDO was shut down in 2006.

## History

KEDO funding per year 1995 to 2005 KEDO funding by country (1995 to 2005)  Country | U.S. dollars (millions)   
---|---  
South Korea | 1,455   
Japan | 498   
United States | 405   
European Atomic  
Energy Community | 122   
Australia | 14   
Others | 18   
  
Formal ground breaking on the site for two light water reactors (LWR) was on
August 19, 1997, at Kumho, 30 km north of Sinpo. The Kumho site had been
previously selected for two similar sized reactors that had been promised in
the 1980s by the Soviet Union, before its collapse.

Soon after the Agreed Framework was signed, U.S. Congress control changed to
the Republican Party, who did not support the agreement. Some Republican
Senators were strongly against the agreement, regarding it as appeasement.
KEDO's first director, Stephen Bosworth, later commented "The Agreed Framework
was a political orphan within two weeks after its signature".

Arranging project financing was not easy, and formal invitations to bid were
not issued until 1998, by which time the delays were infuriating North Korea.
Significant spending on the LWR project did not commence until 2000, with
"First Concrete" pouring at the construction site on August 7, 2002.
Construction of both reactors was well behind the original schedule.

In the wake of the breakdown of the Agreed Framework in 2003, KEDO largely
lost its function. KEDO ensured that the nuclear power plant project assets at
the construction site at Kumho in North Korea and at manufacturers' facilities
around the world ($1.5 billion invested to date) were preserved and
maintained. The project was reported to be about 30% complete. One reactor
containment building was about 50% complete and another about 15% finished. No
key equipment for the reactors had been moved to the site.

In 2005, there were reports indicating that KEDO had agreed in principle to
terminate the light-water reactor project. On January 9, 2006, it was
announced that the project was over and the workers would be returning to
their home countries. North Korea demanded compensation and has refused to
return the approximately $45 million worth of equipment left behind.

## Executive Directors

  * Stephen W. Bosworth, 1995–1997
  * L. Desaix Anderson, 1997–2001
  * Charles Kartman, 2001–2005