International networking platform

NDPHS Secretariat in Stockholm

**The Northern Dimension Partnership in Public Health and Social Well-being
(NDPHS)** is an international networking platform for strengthening
professional connections, sharing and co-creating knowledge, and developing
joint activities in public health and social well-being. The Partnership is
served by the NDPHS Secretariat that was established in 2012 as an
international legal entity hosted by the Swedish Government located in
Stockholm and funded jointly by the Partner Countries.

## History

The cooperation network arose out of the Northern Dimension Forum on Social
Protection and Health held in the city of Joensuu, Finland, in 2002. The NDPHS
was formally established at a ministerial-level meeting in Oslo, Norway on 27
October 2003. Today the Partnership constitutes "an umbrella for activities on
the regional, subregional and local levels, serving as a forum for
coordination and synergies among the various actors.

## Objectives

According to the founding document the main goal of the NDPHS is "to promote
sustainable development in the Northern Dimension area through improving human
health and social wellbeing." In doing so, reducing the spread of major
communicable diseases and preventing life-style related non-communicable
diseases as well as enhancing peoples’ levels of social well-being and
promoting socially rewarding lifestyles are further tasks of the NDPHS. All in
all, as stated in the Oslo Declaration, "the activities (…) should contribute
to greater political and administrative coherence in the area, narrowing of
social and economic differences, and to a general improvement of the quality
of life and of the demographic situation."

## Structure

The highest decision-making body of the NDPHS is the **Partnership Annual
Conference (PAC)** , a high-level ministerial dialogue that formulates the
overall policy orientation of the Partnership. The operational decision-making
body is the **Committee of Senior Representatives (CSR)** which is composed of
senior representatives appointed by each Partner and chaired by a senior
representative of the Partnership. The CSR reports to the PAC, ensuring
fulfillment of decisions and recommendations of the PAC. The chairmanship
rotates among the Partners every two years. In 2024-2025 the Partnership is
chaired by Lithuania and co-chaired by Norway. The major practical work e.g.
the implementation of the NDPHS Strategy and its accompanying Action Plan,
including elaboration and implementation of concrete projects is then done in
the **Expert Groups** (EG) and with projects' partner organizations.

The **NDPHS Secretariat** provides comprehensive support to the Partnership
and implements its own activities and projects that support the mission of the
Partnership. The Secretariat is the main contact point and institutional
memory of the Partnership.

The Partnership’s work is built around ten thematic areas. Seven of them are
led by the Expert Groups specialised in different public health topics. The
remaining three are cross-cutting – they are themes that touch upon the work
of all the structures and are jointly implemented by everyone in the
Partnership.

**Thematic areas:**

  * Antimicrobial Resistance (EG AMR)
  * Alcohol and Substance Use (EG ASA)
  * HIV, Tuberculosis, and Associated Infections (EG HIV, TB&AI)
  * Non-communicable Diseases (EG NCD)
  * Occupational Safety and Health (EG OSH)
  * Primary Healthcare (EG PHC)
  * Prison Health (EG PH)

**Cross-cutting thematic areas**

  * Active and Healthy Ageing
  * Economy of Well-being
  * Health in All Policies.

  

## Activities

The Partnership engages in a number of activities, including policy and
expertise exchange, project development and implementation, information
production and dissemination, and advocacy. The Partnership also works toward
raising awareness of the tremendous impact that the health of populations has
on the economic prosperity of the countries. Another priority is helping to
convey relevant results and recommendations from ongoing and completed
projects to the policy level.

The Partnership is the Policy Area Coordinator for "Health" (PA Health) in the
European Union Strategy of the Baltic Sea Region (EUSBSR). PA Health focuses
on improving and promoting the health - including its social aspects - of
people in the Baltic Sea region as an important precondition for ensuring
sustainable, prosperous, and healthy societies. By providing a platform for
exchange and cooperation across borders and between different sectors, it
enables sharing of best practices, identifying common challenges and goals,
and developing of joint solutions.

## Members

Partner countries:

Northern Dimension Partnership in Public Health and Social Well being Map

  * Estonia
  * Finland
  * Germany
  * Iceland
  * Latvia
  * Lithuania
  * Norway
  * Poland
  * Sweden
  * Russia (suspended in 2022)

  
Partner organizations:

  * European Commission
  * Baltic Sea States Subregional Co-operation (BSSSC)
  * Barents Euro-Arctic Council (BEAC)
  * Council of the Baltic Sea States (CBSS)
  * International Labour Organization (ILO)
  * International Organisation for Migration (IOM)
  * Nordic Council of Ministers (NCM)
  * Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS)
  * World Health Organization (WHO)