Multilateral export control regime

The **Nuclear Suppliers Group** (**NSG**) is a multilateral export control
regime and a group of nuclear supplier countries that seek to contribute to
the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons through the implementation of two
sets of guidelines for nuclear exports and nuclear-related exports.

## History

| This article **needs additional citations forverification**. Please help
improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced
material may be challenged and removed.  
_Find sources:_ "Nuclear Suppliers Group" – news **·** newspapers **·** books
**·** scholar **·** JSTOR _( June 2016)__(Learn how and when to remove this
message)_  
---|---  
  
The NSG was founded in response to India's first nuclear weapon test in May
1974. It first met in November 1975. The test demonstrated that certain non-
weapons specific nuclear technology could be readily turned to weapons
development. Nations already signatories of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation
Treaty (NPT) saw the need to further limit the export of nuclear equipment,
materials or technology. Another benefit was that non-NPT and non-Zangger
Committee nations, then specifically France, could be brought in.

A series of meetings in London from 1975 to 1978 resulted in agreements on the
guidelines for export; these were published as INFCIRC/254 (essentially the
Zangger "Trigger List") by the International Atomic Energy Agency. Listed
items could only be exported to non-nuclear states if certain International
Atomic Energy Agency safeguards were agreed to or if exceptional circumstances
relating to safety existed.

The name of the "London Club" was due to the series of meetings in London. It
has also been referred to as the London Group, or the London Suppliers Group.

The NSG did not meet again until 1991. The "Trigger List" remained unchanged
until 1991, although the Zangger list was regularly updated. The revelations
about the Iraqi weapons program following the first Gulf War led to a
tightening of the export of so-called dual-use equipment. At the first meeting
since 1978, held at the Hague in March 1991, the twenty-six participating
governments agreed to the changes, which were published as the "Dual-use List"
in 1992, and also to the extension of the original list to more closely match
the up-to-date Zangger list.

## Participating governments

Initially the NSG had seven participating governments: Canada, West Germany,
France, Japan, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, and the United States. In
1976–77, participation was expanded to fifteen with the admittance of Belgium,
Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Poland, Sweden, and
Switzerland. Germany was reunited in 1990 while Czechoslovakia broke up into
the Czech Republic and Slovakia in 1993. Twelve more nations joined up to
1990. Following the collapse of the Soviet Union a number of former republics
were given observer status as a stage towards future membership. China became
a participating government in 2004. The European Commission and the Zangger
Committee Chair participate as observers. The NSG Chair for 2024–2025 is South
Africa.

The 48 participating governments and their accession date, as of 2022[update]:

  * Argentina(1994)
  * Australia(1978)
  * Austria(1991)
  * Belarus(2000)
  * Belgium(1978)
  * Brazil(1996)
  * Bulgaria(1984)
  * Canada(1974)
  * People's Republic of China(2004)
  * Croatia(2005)
  * Cyprus(2000)
  * Czech Republic(1978*)
  * Denmark(1984)
  * Estonia(2004)
  * Finland(1980)
  * France(1974)
  * Germany(1974)
  * Greece1984)
  * Hungary(1985)
  * Iceland(2009)
  * Ireland(1984)
  * Italy(1978)
  * Japan(1974)
  * Kazakhstan(2002)
  * Latvia(1997)
  * Lithuania(2004)
  * Luxembourg(1984)
  * Malta(2004)
  * Mexico(2012)
  * Netherlands(1978)
  * New Zealand(1994)
  * Norway(1989)
  * Poland(1978)
  * Portugal(1986)
  * Romania(1990)
  * Russia(1974)
  * Serbia(2013)
  * Slovakia(1978*)
  * Slovenia(2000)
  * South Africa(1995)
  * South Korea(1995)
  * Spain(1988)
  * Sweden(1978)
  * Switzerland(1978)
  * Turkey(2000)
  * Ukraine(1996)
  * United Kingdom(1974)
  * United States(1974)

* Czechoslovakia separated into the Czech Republic and Slovakia – participation date 5 Mar 1993. 

## Candidates

### Chile

Chile has been candidate for the Nuclear Suppliers Group since 2015 as part of
its national commitments with the UNSC resolution 1540 of 2004. In its 2017
report to UN about prevention of arms proliferation has presented a National
Plan of Action (2017–2021) that includes as targets membership to the Nuclear
Suppliers Group and the Wassenaar Arrangement.

### India

Countries supporting NSG membership for India

During a state visit to India in November 2010, U.S. President Barack Obama
announced U.S. support for India's participation in the Nuclear Suppliers
Group, the Wassenaar Arrangement, the Australia Group and the Missile
Technology Control Regime, "in a phased manner," and to encourage the
evolution of regime participation criteria to that end, "consistent with
maintaining the core principles of these regimes."

During a visit to India in December 2010, French President Sarkozy expressed
his country's backing for India's inclusion in the Nuclear Suppliers Group.
The United Kingdom has for a long time been a supporter of India's inclusion.
During a Republic Day visit to India in January 2015, Obama said that India
was ready for membership. Russian president Vladimir Putin has offered
unconditional support for India's entry. Switzerland announced its backing of
India's participation in the group on 6 June 2016 during Prime Minister
Narendra Modi's visit to Geneva. Obama reiterated U.S. support for India's
membership on 8 June 2016 during Modi's visit to Washington DC. Japan has
expressed support for India's bid for accession.

China is opposing India's accession, citing Pakistan's non-admission to the
exclusive group. Other countries opposing Indian membership on the basis of
the NPT non-signatory status of India included New Zealand, Ireland and
Austria.

In June 2016, India got crucial support from Mexico in its bid to become a
participant ahead of a plenary meeting of the 48-nation bloc whose members are
allowed to trade in and export nuclear technology. On 17 June, British Prime
Minister David Cameron had assured Modi of the UK's "firm support" for India's
membership bid. In an interview on 18 June, Putin said that he was 'positive'
about India's entry. On 20 June, Canada stated that NSG will be strengthened
with India's presence. On 22 June France reiterated its support to India, and
urged all the other 48 members of the NSG to allow entry for India. China
remains opposed to Indian membership.

In July 2016, South Africa agreed to back India's entry. In August 2016,
Turkey confirmed support for India's membership bid. On 4 September 2016,
Australia reiterated its commitment to India's bid for membership just ahead
of the G20 summit in Hangzhou, China. On 5 September 2016, Modi thanked
Argentina for backing India's bid.

On 17 October 2016, following the BRICS summit in Benaulim, Goa, Brazil
officially backed India's bid for membership. On 26 October 2016, Prime
Minister Key of New Zealand stated that "New Zealand would continue to
contribute constructively to the process currently underway in the NSG to
consider India's membership." Poland and Cyprus backed India's bid in April
2017. Germany reaffirmed India's membership bid in May 2017. Switzerland also
showed support, Swiss Foreign Ministry spokesperson Pierre-Alain Eltschinger
saying that "We support India's application for participation in the NSG and
acknowledge India's support to global non-proliferation efforts." During the
15th RIC (Russia, India, China) foreign ministerial meeting Russia said it
continues to support India’s entry. Describing India as a leading power in the
Indo-Pacific region, Washington's envoy to New Delhi Kenneth Juster reaffirmed
support for India’s bid in January 2018. In the joint press statement of an
India–Nordic countries summit, the Nordic countries welcomed India’s
application for membership and reaffirmed their commitment to work
constructively within the Group with the aim of reaching a positive outcome at
the earliest opportunity in April 2018. On 16 April 2018 Germany supported
India's bid for membership saying that its inclusion will boost the global
export control system. Reaffirming their commitment to global non-
proliferation efforts, PM Conte reiterated Italy's support to India's
intensified engagement for admission in Oct 2018 during the 24th edition of
the India-Italy Technology Summit.

As of 2019, China has thwarted every attempt of India's inclusion into NSG and
has made it clear that status quo will remain citing "lack of consensus" among
NSG members.

### Namibia

Namibia applied for NSG membership in 2016.

### Pakistan

Pakistan applied for participation on 19 May 2016. Pakistan has stressed the
need for NSG to adopt a non-discriminatory criteria-based approach for NSG
membership of the countries, which have never been party to the nuclear Non-
Proliferation Treaty (NPT).

Pakistan is supported by Turkey and China. Pakistan has launched a major
lobbying campaign to get additional support on its NSG membership. The US has
not publicly opposed Pakistan, the US State Department's Spokesperson Mark
Toner commented in May 2016: “They have made public their interest, and
certainly any country can submit its application for membership. And we’ll
consider [it] based on a consensus decision.” Subsequently, NSG initiated
discussions on the ‘Technical, Legal, and Political aspects of participation
of non-NPT states in the NSG’ in the Seoul Plenary in June 2017. China has
also tied Indian bid to Pakistani bid, blocking the former's entry repeatedly
based on the argument that If India can be let in without signing NPT, then
Pakistan should be granted membership as well.

In 2004, the illicit procurement network run by Pakistani scientist AQ Khan,
who led Pakistan's uranium enrichment program, was exposed. This network
trafficked in nuclear and dual-use goods and supported nuclear weapons
programs in Iran, Libya and North Korea as well as Pakistan itself, and
included individuals and entities from over 30 countries. In 2004, Pakistan
also promulgated an Export Control Act on Goods, Technologies, Materials and
Equipment related to Nuclear and Biological Weapons and their Delivery Systems
and published Export Control Lists in 2005, which have been frequently
updated. The United States on 26 March 2018 sanctioned seven Pakistani firms
for nuclear proliferation, potentially hurting its ambitions of NSG
membership.

  

## Role in India-US nuclear agreement

In July 2006, the United States Congress amended U.S. law to accommodate
civilian nuclear trade with India. A meeting of NSG participating governments
on 21–22 August 2008 on an India-specific exemption to the Guidelines was
inconclusive. Several participating governments, including Austria,
Switzerland, Norway, Ireland, and New Zealand, expressed reservations about
the lack of conditions in the proposed exemption. In another meeting on 6
September 2008, the NSG participating governments agreed to grant India a
"clean waiver" from its existing rules, which forbid nuclear trade with a
country which has not signed the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT). The
NSG's decision came after three days of intense U.S. diplomacy. The approval
was based on a formal pledge by India stating that it would not share
sensitive nuclear technology or material with others and would uphold its
voluntary moratorium on testing nuclear weapons. The pledge was contained in a
crucial statement issued during the NSG meeting by India outlining the
country's disarmament and nonproliferation policies.