European intergovernmental organisation

The **Organisation for Joint Armament Cooperation** (French: _Organisation
Conjointe de Coopération en matière d'ARmement_ ; **OCCAR**) is a European
intergovernmental organisation that facilitates and manages collaborative
armament programmes through their lifecycle between the governments of
Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, Spain, and the United Kingdom.

## History

OCCAR was established on 12 November 1996 by the Defence Ministers of France,
Germany, Italy and the United Kingdom. Legal status was not achieved, however,
until January 2001 when the parliaments of the four founding states ratified
the OCCAR Convention. Other European nations may join OCCAR, subject to their
actual involvement in a substantive collaborative equipment programme
involving at least one OCCAR partner and ratification of the OCCAR Convention.
Belgium and Spain joined the organisation in respectively 2003 and 2005.

Other states can participate to OCCAR programmes without becoming a member
state. Currently the European Union member states and/or NATO members Turkey,
Netherlands, Luxembourg, Finland, Sweden, Lithuania and Poland participate in
one or more OCCAR programmes without being formal members. Australia also
participates in OCCAR as a non-member with a focus on the Boxer, Tiger ARH and
MU-90 Impact platforms.

In 2023 Australia became the first non-European country to act as a
participating state as part of OCCAR when it signed onto the MU-90 In-service
support program. In November 2023 the Netherlands voiced its intention to join
OCCAR.

## Structure

The highest decision-making body within OCCAR as corporate organisation is the
Board of Supervisors (BoS). Each OCCAR programmes is supervised by a Programme
Board (strategic decisions) and a Programme Committee (operational decisions).
The programmes are executed by the OCCAR Executive Administration (OCCAR-EA)
in accordance with the decisions of the supervisory bodies. OCCAR-EA is headed
by the OCCAR Director (Joachim Sucker since Feb 2023) and consists of a
Central Office and the Programme Divisions. OCCAR-EA employs over 300 staff
members.

## Current programmes

The 16 programmes currently managed by OCCAR are the following:

### Aircraft

  * Airbus A400M Atlas turboprop military transport aircraft
  * Eurocopter Tiger attack helicopter
  * Eurodrone or European Medium Altitude Long Endurance Remotely Piloted Aircraft System (MALE RPAS)
  * Multinational Multi-Role Tanker Transport Fleet (MMF)

### Intelligence and communications

  * European Secure Software-defined Radio (ESSOR)

  * COBRA counter-battery radar system
  * Multinational Space-based Imaging System (MUSIS)
  * Night Vision Capability - 2021 acquisition of 9,550 units for Belgium and Germany, from a consortium of Hensoldt and Theon Sensors

### Land vehicles

  * Boxer multirole armoured vehicle

### Missiles/Torpedoes

  * FSAF & PAAMS surface-to-air anti-missile systems
  * Future Tactical Air-to-Surface Missile (_Missile Air-Sol Tactique Futur_ , MAST-F) - under development for French Tiger III by MBDA
  * MU90 Impact

### Ships

  * FREMM Multimission frigates
  * Logistic Support Ships - _Vulcano_ -class logistic support ships for Italy and _Bâtiment ravitailleur de forces_ for France
  * Maritime Mine Counter Measures (MCMM)
  * _Thaon di Revel_ -class offshore patrol vessel (_Pattugliatore Polivalente d'Altura,_ PPA _)_
  * U212 Near Future Submarine