Military unit

The **System of Cooperation Among the American Air Forces** (Spanish: _Sistema
de Cooperación entre las Fuerzas Aéreas Americanas_ , SICOFAA) is an
apolitical voluntary international organization among the North and South
American air forces.

SICOFAA's mission is to promote and strengthen the bonds of friendship
prevalent in the Air Forces of the American Continent, members of the System,
as well as to achieve the mutual support among them through their cooperation
to act jointly when directed to do so by their respective governments.
Critical topics include air operations, human resources, education and
training, search and rescue, disasters relief, telecommunications, aerospace
medicine, weather, prevention of plane crashes, and scientific research.

**System of Cooperation Among the American Air Forces** (Spanish: _Sistema de
Cooperación entre las Fuerzas Aéreas Americanas_) or _SICOFAA_. Is based out
of Davis-Monthan Air Force Base, Arizona. SICOFAA started in 1961 as a forum
for senior leaders from Air Forces in the Western Hemisphere to discuss
military issues and aviation topics. Today, the organization has become more
formalized, but has kept to its voluntary and apolitical status while striving
to foster friendship and cooperation among American Air Forces through the
interchange of experiences, training and education. _SICOFAA_ also develops
procedures and plans to facilitate combined actions between air components of
member nations.

_SICOFAA_ holds a yearly meeting called the **Conference of the American Air
Chiefs** or **CONJEFAMER** , this is where air chiefs and representatives from
21 Western Hemisphere member nations meet, ranging from Canada to Argentina.

The location of each year's _CONJEFAMER_ conference rotates among member
nations; this year (2014) the Colombian Air Force hosted the military
delegations during the week-long event.

Conference attendees meet to confer over recommendations and programs proposed
during _CONJEFAMER_ committee meetings held earlier this year.

The Organizations focused on the professional Airman and the interests of Air
Forces of each nation are vital in ensuring governments understand what
airpower can provide to their citizens. SICOFAA ensures issues that apply to
Air Forces across the Americas are discussed in an atmosphere of trust and
understanding and that there is much we can learn from one another.

## History

On April 16, 1961, US Air Force Chief of Staff Thomas D. White hosted a
conference at Randolph Air Force Base. Here the delegates proposed on creating
an organization that would help fortify the inter-institutional relations and
planning of effective professional cooperation of the American Air Forces.

In 1964, the Peruvian Air Force proposed the creation of a voluntary
organization of mutual professional relations in a document titled "Bases and
Procedures for a Cooperation System between the American Air Forces". This
document was accepted in 1965 as the first corporate charter of SICOFAA.

Before 1990 SICOFAA consisted of three parts: the administrative (SPS), the
communications (SITFAA), and the educational (IAAFA). During that time SICOFAA
was under the Twelfth Air Force (AFSOUTH). It was in that year that Hurricane
Andrew destroyed Homstead Air Force Base where both the administrative and
educational parts of SICOFAA were stationed. It was then that SICOFAA was
reorganized, IAAFA was moved to Lackland AFB and the administrative portion
was moved to Andrews AFB. After this reorganization, the administrative
partition was the only one that remained under the Twelfth Air Force. In 2011
the administrative portion was physically realigned to be collocated with the
Twelfth Air Force (AFSOUTH) at Davis-Monthan AFB to be better supported.

## Members

System of Cooperation Among the American Air Forces Map

SICOFAA is composed of 23 member countries:

     Argentina
     Belize
     Bolivia
     Brazil
     Canada
     Chile
     Colombia
     Costa Rica
     Dominican Republic
     Ecuador
     El Salvador
     Guatemala
     Guyana
     Honduras
     Jamaica
     Mexico
     Nicaragua
     Panama
     Paraguay
     Peru
     United States
     Uruguay
     Venezuela

And two observer countries:

     Haiti
     Trinidad and Tobago

## Organization

### Committees

Committees are permanent organisms that study and analyze subjects,
interchange ideas and share procedures that improve the operations and
collaboration between the member countries of SICOFAA.

### SPS

The **SICOFAA Permanent Secretariat** (Spanish: _Secretaría Permanente del
Sistema_ , SPS) is responsible for administrative functions of SICOFAA and is
located at Davis-Monthan Air Force Base. Its purpose is to centralize and
ensure continuity and permanence to all the activities of SICOFAA as they are
established at the CONJEFAMER. The SPS consists of a Secretary General (an
USAF O-6), and a Sub Secretary, and Editor, and other support staff (military
and civilian). The Sub Secretary position rotates among Colonels of the member
countries, it is a two-year tour.

### OENFA

The **Liaison Officer of the Air Force** (Spanish: _Oficial Enlace de la
Fuerza Aérea_ , OENFA) is the link between Air Force Chiefs of Staff and
SICOFAA. Each member country has an OENFA.

### SITFAA

SITFAA logo

The **Information Technology and Telecommunications System of the American Air
Forces** (Spanish: _Sistema de Informática y Telecomunicaciones de las Fuerzas
Aéreas de América_ , SITFAA) is responsible for communications between
SICOFAA's member countries. In 1964 SITFAA was created to meet the
communication needs of SICOFAA. Originally SITFAA was part of the Science and
Technology Committee but advances and technology have spurred SITFAA to become
its own entity inside SICOFAA.

SITFAA's capabilities include voice, fax, Internet, and High Frequency. Each
country has its own station within the SITFAA network.

Each member country has a SITFAA station, however, after SICOFAA reorganized
in 1990 the United States SITFAA station moved from Albrook AFS, Republic of
Panama, to Andrews AFB in Maryland. It then moved to its present location at
Davis-Monthan AFB in 2014. The United States does not have a SITFAA station,
its station serves as the Master Net Control Station (_ECR or Estacion en
Control de la Red_).

#### Network

SITFAA is broken into two networks: the Northern Circuit (_Circuito Norte_)
and Southern Circuit (_Circuito Sur_).

The Northern Circuit consists of:

  * Canada
  * Colombia

  * El Salvador
  * United States
  * Guatemala

  * Honduras
  * Jamaica
  * Mexico
  * Nicaragua
  * Panama
  * Dominican Republic

The Southern Circuit consists of:

  * Argentina
  * Bolivia
  * Brazil
  * Chile
  * Ecuador
  * Guyana
  * Paraguay
  * Peru
  * Uruguay
  * Venezuela

The United States is the Network Control Station (_Estación Control de la Red_
, ECR). This station is staffed by two operators and an officer stationed at
Davis-Monthan Air Force Base.

Each circuit members take turns being the Northern Circuit Control Station
(_Estación Control del Circuito Norte_ , ECCN) or the Southern Circuit Control
Station (_Estación Control del Circuito Sur_ , ECCS).

### Meetings

Each year, the committees meet and discuss their fields. The findings are then
brought to the yearly PREPLAN where the member countries decide on what topics
will be discussed for implementation in the Conference of the Chiefs of the
American Air Forces (_Conferencia de los Jefes de las Fuerzas Aéreas
Americanas_ , CONJEFAMER).

During the years that an exercise will take place, named COOPERACIÓN, there
are three planning meeting prior to the exercise. If time permits, there will
be a fifth meeting (the exercise counting as one) to compile all the lessons
learned. These lessons learned are then brought to the yearly PREPLAN where
the member countries finalize the presentations that will be conducted during
the CONJEFAMER.

The top Generals of the member Air Forces make decisions on the findings of
the committees brought before them. The Chief of the Air Force of the host
nation awards the SICOFAA Legion of Merit Medal at this conference.

## Awards

The Legion of Merit Award American Aviation Fellowship, was created in the
XVIII CONJEFAMER, which was held in the United States in 1978, with the aim of
encouraging those military or civilian, public or private institutions,
relating to Air Forces in the Americas, whose actions have promoted and
fostered the growth and importance of the System of Cooperation among American
Air Forces (SICOFAA).

  * SICOFAA Legion of Merit Gentleman
  * SICOFAA Legion of Merit Officer
  * SICOFAA Legion of Merit Grand Cross