UN agency for human settlements and sustainable urban development

The **United Nations Human Settlements Programme** (**UN-Habitat**) is the
United Nations programme for human settlements and sustainable urban
development. It was established in 1977 as an outcome of the first United
Nations Conference on Human Settlements and Sustainable Urban Development
(Habitat I) held in Vancouver, Canada, in 1976. UN-Habitat maintains its
headquarters at the United Nations Office at Nairobi, Kenya. It is mandated by
the United Nations General Assembly to promote socially and environmentally
sustainable towns and cities with the goal of providing adequate shelter for
all. It is a member of the United Nations Development Group. The mandate of
UN-Habitat derives from the Habitat Agenda, adopted by the United Nations
Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) in Istanbul, Turkey, in 1996. The
twin goals of the Habitat Agenda are adequate shelter for all and the
development of sustainable human settlements in an urbanizing world.

## Overview

UN-Habitat headquarters at the United Nations Office at Nairobi

The UN-Habitat mandate is also derived from General Assembly resolution 3327
(XXIX), by which the Assembly established the United Nations Habitat and Human
Settlements Foundation; resolution 32/162, by which the Assembly established
the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat); and resolution
56/206, by which the Assembly transformed the Commission on Human Settlements
and the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat), including the
United Nations Habitat and Human Settlements Foundation, into UN-Habitat. The
mandate of UN-Habitat is further derived from other internationally agreed
development goals, including those contained in the United Nations Millennium
Declaration (Assembly resolution 55/2), in particular the target of achieving
a significant improvement in the lives of at least 100 million slum-dwellers
by 2020; and the target on water and sanitation of the Plan of Implementation
of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, which seeks to halve, by 2015,
the proportion of people without sustainable access to safe drinking water and
basic sanitation. Through Assembly resolution 65/1, Member States committed
themselves to continue working towards cities without slums, beyond current
targets, by reducing slum populations and improving the lives of slum-
dwellers.

## Work and projects

UN-Habitat office in Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau (Barcelona)

UN-Habitat works in more than 70 countries on five continents focusing on
seven areas:

  * Urban legislation, land and governance;
  * Urban planning and design;
  * Urban economy;
  * Urban basic services;
  * Housing and slum upgrading;
  * Risk reduction and rehabilitation;
  * Urban research and capacity development.

UN-Habitat works with local partners, for example Doh Eain in Yangon, Myanmar
which focuses on urban regeneration and heritage conservation.

## Governance

The governance structure of the programme is made up of three decision-making
bodies: the UN-Habitat Assembly, an executive board and a Committee of
Permanent Representatives. Previously, The Governing Council was the decision-
making body for the Programme, but it was dissolved following a resolution
passed by the UN General Assembly.

The assembly is a universal body composed of the 193 member states of the
United Nations and convenes every four years at the Headquarters of UN-Habitat
in Nairobi. The first assembly was held in May 2019. The presidency of the
first assembly was held by Mexico. Mexico's presidency was represented by
Martha Delgado Peralta the Mexican Undersecretary of Multilateral Affairs and
Human Rights.

The second decision-making body of the programme is the executive board, which
is made up of 36 member states elected by the UN-Habitat Assembly with
representatives from every regional group. The board meets three times
annually. The Committee of Permanent Representatives of UN-Habitat (CPR) is
composed of all Permanent Representatives accredited to the United Nations
Office at Nairobi.

The UN-Habitat secretariat is headed by an executive director nominated by the
UN Secretary-General with the approval of the UN General Assembly. The current
executive director is Anacláudia Rossbach of Brazil, who was appointed in June
2024. The deputy executive director is Michal Mlynár of Slovakia who was
appointed by in December 2022.

### List of executive directors

  1. Arcot Ramachandran, India, 1978–1992
  2. Elizabeth Dowdeswell, Canada, 1993–1994
  3. Wally N’Dow, Gambia, 1994–1997
  4. Darshan Johal, Canada, 1997–1998
  5. Klaus Töpfer, Germany, 1998–2000
  6. Anna Tibaijuka, Tanzania, 2000–2010
  7. Joan Clos, Spain, 2010–2018
  8. Maimunah Mohd Sharif, Malaysia, 2018–2024
  9. Anacláudia Rossbach, Brazil, 2024- 

Before 2002, the title of the head of the programme was director of the United
Nations Centre for Human Settlements.

  

## World Urban Forum (WUF)

The World Urban Forum was established by the United Nations in 2001 to examine
one of the most pressing issues facing the world: rapid urbanization and its
impact on communities, cities, economies and climate change. Over the past two
decades, the World Urban Forum has evolved into the premier global conference
on sustainable urbanization. Convened by the United Nations Human Settlements
Programme (UN-Habitat), the forum is a unique non-legislative platform and one
of the most inclusive international gatherings on urban issues. The first WUF
was held in Nairobi, Kenya in 2002 and has been held around the world ever
since. It is organized biennially in different locations around the world.

## World Urban Campaign (WUC)

The World Urban Campaign is an initiative led by UN-Habitat that seeks to
promote sustainable urban development and livable cities around the world. Its
primary objective is to advocate for the implementation of the New Urban
Agenda, a global framework adopted by the United Nations in 2016 to guide
urban development policies and strategies for the next 20 years. The campaign
brings together a diverse range of partners, including governments, civil
society organizations, private sector actors, and academic institutions, to
collaborate on urban development issues. It focuses on a number of key themes,
including affordable housing, sustainable mobility, resilient urban planning,
and social inclusion.

## World Habitat Day

The United Nations has designated the first Monday of October every year as
World Habitat Day. This is an occasion to reflect on the state of our towns
and cities and the basic right of all to adequate shelter. It is also intended
to remind the world of its collective responsibility for the future of human
habitat.

## UN-Habitat Scroll of Honor Award

The UN-Habitat Scroll of Honour Award was launched in 1989 and is one of the
world's most prestigious human settlements awards. It aims to acknowledge
initiatives that have made outstanding contributions in the field of human
settlements, provision of housing, highlighting the plight of people living in
poverty or who have been displaced, developing and improving human settlements
and the quality of urban life to leave no one behind echoing the Sustainable
Development Goals 2030 with emphasis on Goal 11: Sustainable Cities and
Communities.

## United Nations Advisory Committee of Local Authorities

The United Nations Advisory Committee of Local Authorities (UNACLA) was
established in 2000 in line with the UN Habitat Governing Council Resolution
17/18 of 1999 as an advisory body to strengthen the dialogue of the UN System
with local authorities in relation to the implementation of the Habitat
Agenda. In September 2004, UN-HABITAT established a formal relationship with
United Cities and Local Governments, which now chairs UNACLA and holds 10 of
its 20 seats. UCLG co-hosts the UNACLA secretariat with UN-Habitat.

## Members

  1. Institute for Housing and Urban Development Studies (IHS)
  2. International Institute of Social Studies (ISS)