Teaching institute of the United Nations

The **United Nations System Staff College** (**UNSSC**) is a UN organization
that serves the personnel of the United Nations and its affiliates via inter-
agency learning and training.

## History

In 1993, Secretary-General Boutros-Ghali created a joint United Nations-
International Labour Organization team to seriously consider the creation of a
staff college, tasking it with creating a concrete proposal. The proposal of
the team was accepted in 1995. A UN Staff College Project was inaugurated in
1997 at the ILO Turin Campus, with an inaugural workshop organized by the UN
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and United Nations
Development Programme, opened by Secretary-General Annan on 12 April 1997. The
subject of the DHA-UNDP Workshop was "Building Bridges between Relief and
Development", 12 to 17 April 1997, and it coincided with a meeting of the
heads of UN agencies, the United Nations Chief Executives' Board for
Coordination (CEB) (then known as the Advisory Committee on Coordination) who
attended the inauguration. Based on experience of training activities over the
following years, an independent team evaluated the plan for the college in
August 2000 and recommended that the United Nations formally draw up a statute
for the formal creation of the staff college.

The college was formally created by the General Assembly on 20 December 2000
via Res. 55/207. This resolution called for "an institution for system-wide
knowledge management, training and learning for the staff of the United
Nations system". It also specified that special attention be paid to the areas
of economic and social development, peace and security and the internal
management of the United Nations system.

On 12 July 2001, the General Assembly approved the Statute of the College via
Res. 55/278. This statute laid out the College's objectives, governance
structure, finances, and staffing criteria, among other things.

## Campuses

The Turin Campus serves as the UNSSC Headquarters, offering learning and
training programmes focused in the areas of leadership and management, and
peace and security.

The UNSSC Bonn Office focuses on developing learning opportunities in the
areas of sustainable development, change management and organizational
development, and advancing academic partnerships.