UN subsidiary organ

The **United Nations Development Fund for Women** (**UNIFEM** ; French: _Fonds
de développement des Nations unies pour la femme_ ; Spanish: _Fondo de
Desarrollo de las Naciones Unidas para la Mujer_) was established in December
1976 originally as the Voluntary Fund for the United Nations Decade for Women
in the International Women's Year. Its first director was Margaret C. Snyder.
UNIFEM provided financial and technical assistance to innovative programmes
and strategies that promoted women's human rights, political participation and
economic security. Since 1976 it supported women's empowerment and gender
equality through its programme offices and links with women's organizations in
the major regions of the world. Its work on gender responsive budgets began in
1996 in Southern Africa and expanded to include East Africa, Southeast Asia,
South Asia, Central America and the Andean region. It worked to increase
awareness throughout the UN system of gender-responsive budgets as a tool to
strengthen economic governance in all countries. In 2011, UNIFEM merged with
some other smaller entities to become UN Women.

## About

2010 meeting in Ecuador

UNIFEM was an autonomous organization working closely with the UN Development
Programme (UNDP), although the resolution also specified that the fund's
resources should supplement, not substitute for, the responsibilities of other
United Nations development cooperation agencies. UNIFEM helped fund projects
that aided women and their families. UNIFEM developed a strategy of aiding
women to become their "own agents for change rather than recipients of
charity." UNIFEM also helped to ensure that UN programmes followed guidelines
developed by the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women (CEDAW). UNIFEM was also involved in recognizing women's rights
as human rights. It advocated gender equality around the world. UNIFEM also
saw women's rights as an issue of peace and security.

UNIFEM operated on a budget of voluntary contributions to the organization.
The organization was based in New York City. Different countries and regions
had their own committees within UNIFEM. UNIFEM was one of the smaller agencies
at the UN and was situated lower in the UN hierarchy, according to Canadian
politician Stephen Lewis.

## History

The First World Conference on Women in 1975 influenced the creation of UNIFEM.
World governments saw the need to put resources into dealing with women's
issues after the First Conference. The United Nations Voluntary Fund for the
Decade for Women (UNVFDW) was established by the United Nations General
Assembly in December 1976 right after the conference. Margaret Snyder started
working as the leader of the organization in 1978.

### 1980s

The UNVFDW was given an expanded mandate by the General Assembly in February
1985, when it became the United Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM).
Under resolution 39/125, the new fund was called on to support and advocate
for innovative and catalytic activities that would give voice and visibility
to the women of the developing world.

Funding for UNIFEM projects doubled in size between 1985 and 1988.

### 1990s

In the 1990s, UNIFEM became involved in broadening its scope. The organization
began a campaign to define "women's rights as human rights" and how violence
against women was also an economic development issue. UNIFEM hired researchers
such as Roxanna Carrillo to demonstrate how violence against women was linked
to a lack of women's access to economic opportunity. The campaign for "women's
rights as human rights" was especially effective. UNIFEM began working on
projects to reduce gender-based violence and also to raise awareness of the
problem.

Also in the 1990s, African Women in Crisis (AFWIC) was created by UNIFEM to
focus on issues facing people in Africa. AFWIC helped women who were displaced
due to violence or emergencies in their own countries. AFWIC expanded on work
begun by Laketch Dirasse in East Africa.

The work of UNIFEM helped shape the issues addressed at the Fourth World
Conference on Women in 1995. Women at the conference decided that it was
important that they "claim formal power to directly shape public policy".

UNIFEM created a trust fund to help support twenty-three projects to combat
gender-based violence and war crimes against women. The fund began funding
projects in 1997.

### 2000s

UNIFEM was granted "executing agency status" by UNDP in 2000. This allowed the
organization to complete and work on projects for UNDP that related to women's
rights and gender equality.

UNIFEM released a new biennial report, _Progress of the World's Women_ in
2001. The report outlined what UNIFEM had achieved in previous decades. Also
in 2001, in conjunction with International Alert, UNIFEM launched the
Millennium Peace Prize for Women.

Noeleen Heyzer, head of UNIFEM, asked for the creation of an international
commission on violence against women.

On January 26, 2006, UNIFEM nominated Nicole Kidman as its goodwill
ambassador.

The last executive director of UNIFEM was Inés Alberdi.

### 2010s

In January 2011, UNIFEM was merged into UN Women, a composite entity of the
UN, with International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of
Women (INSTRAW), Office of the Special Adviser on Gender Issues (OSAGI), and
Division for the Advancement of Women (DAW).

## Executive directors

Executive directors of the organization have been:

Nr | Director | From country | Term   
---|---|---|---  
4. | Inés Alberdi |  Spain | 2007–2014   
3. | Noeleen Heyzer |  Singapore | 1994–2007   
2. | Sharon Capeling-Alakija |  Canada | 1989–1994   
1. | Margaret C. Snyder |  United States | 1978–1989