Intergovernmental organization

UNODC headquarters in Vienna

The **United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime** (**UNODC** ; French: _Office
des Nations unies contre la drogue et le crime_) is a United Nations office
that was established in 1997 as the **Office for Drug Control and Crime
Prevention** by combining the United Nations International Drug Control
Program (UNDCP) and the Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Division in the
United Nations Office at Vienna, adopting the current name in 2002.

The agency's focus is the trafficking and abuse of illicit drugs, crime
prevention and criminal justice, international terrorism, and political
corruption. It is a member of the United Nations Development Group. In
2022–23, it had an estimated biannual budget of US$822 million.

## History

The United Nations International Drug Control Program (UNDCP) and the Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice Division in the United Nations Office at
Vienna were merged to form the Office for Drug Control and Crime Prevention.
This was renamed United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) in 2002.

## Organisational structure

Yury Fedotov, former Director General of the United Nations Office in Vienna
and former Executive Director of UNODC, delivers his welcome address at the
first day of the 57th IAEA General Conference. M-Building, IAEA Headquarters,
Vienna, Austria. 16 September 2013.

### Locations

UNODC, which as of 2020 employs around 3400 people worldwide, has its
headquarters in Vienna, Austria, with 115 field offices and two liaison
offices in Brussels and in New York City. The United Nations Secretary-General
appoints the agency's Executive Director. Yuri Fedotov, the former Russian
Ambassador to the United Kingdom, held this position from 2010 until 2019,
when the United Nations Secretary-General announced that Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly
of Egypt would replace him as both executive director of UNODC and Director
General of the United Nations Office at Vienna.[_citation needed_]

Main operating locations:

  * Africa and Middle East
  * Europe and West/Central Asia
  * Latin America and the Caribbean
  * Southeast Asia and the Pacific
  * South Asia

Liaison Office(s) · Brussels · New York

### Sub agencies

The United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Programme Network
(PNI) [wikidata] is a network consisting of UNODC as well as many crime-
related institutes and other centres around the world. Its aim is to
strengthen international co-operation in the areas of crime prevention and
criminal justice. The network facilitates the "exchange of information,
research, training and public education".

UNODC incorporates the secretariat of the International Narcotics Control
Board (INCB).

UNODC's Terrorism Prevention Branch was headed by International terrorism
studies expert Alex P. Schmid from 1999 to 2005.

The agency is a member of the United Nations Sustainable Development Group.

### Budget

In 2022–2023 it had an estimated biannual budget of US$822 million.

## Aims and functions

UNODC was established to assist the UN in better addressing a coordinated,
comprehensive response to the interrelated issues of illicit trafficking in
and abuse of drugs, crime prevention and criminal justice, international
terrorism, and political corruption. These goals are pursued through three
primary functions: research, guidance and support to governments in the
adoption and implementation of various crime-, drug-, terrorism-, and
corruption-related conventions, treaties and protocols, as well as
technical/financial assistance to said governments to face their respective
situations and challenges in these fields.

The office aims long-term to better equip governments to handle drug-, crime-,
terrorism-, and corruption-related issues, to maximise knowledge on these
issues among governmental institutions and agencies, and also to maximise
awareness of said matters in public opinion, globally, nationally and at
community level. Approximately 90% of the Office's funding comes from
voluntary contributions, mainly from governments.

These are the main themes that UNODC deals with: alternative development,
anti-corruption, criminal justice, prison reform and crime prevention, drug
prevention, treatment and care, HIV and AIDS, human trafficking and migrant
smuggling, money laundering, organized crime, piracy, terrorism prevention.

## The _World Drug Report_

The _World Drug Report_ is a yearly publication that presents a comprehensive
assessment of the international drug problem, with detailed information on the
illicit drug situation. It provides estimates and information on trends in the
production, trafficking and use of opium/heroin, coca/cocaine, cannabis and
amphetamine-type stimulants. The Report, based on data and estimates collected
or prepared by Governments, UNODC and other international institutions,
attempts to identify trends in the evolution of global illicit drug markets.

Through the _World Drug Report_ , UNODC aims to enhance member states'
understanding of global illicit drug trends and increase their awareness of
the need for the more systematic collection and reporting of data relating to
illicit drugs.

## Treaties

United Nations Conventions and their related Protocols underpin all the
operational work of UNODC.

### Crime-related treaties

#### United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime

The convention is a legally binding instrument that entered into force on 29
September 2003, through which States parties commit to taking a series of
measures against transnational organized crime. States that ratify the
convention has the duty of creation of domestic offences to combat the
problem, the adoption of new, sweeping frameworks for mutual legal assistance,
extradition, law enforcement cooperation, technical assistance and training.
The convention signifies an important stage in dealing with transnational
crime by recognizing the seriousness of the problem that the crime poses, and
gaining understanding from the member states of the importance of a
cooperative measure. The convention is complemented by three different
protocols:

  * the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and Children;
  * the Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air; and
  * the Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, their Parts and Components and Ammunition.

The Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
especially Women and Children aims to provide a convergence in the states'
domestic offences in the investigation and the persecution process. Another
objective of the protocol is to protect the victims of trafficking in persons
with full respect.

The Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air is
concerned with the aggravating problem of organized crime groups for smuggling
persons. The protocol aims to combat and prevent transnational smuggling as
well as to promote cooperative measures for enhancing protective measures for
victims.

The Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms,
their Parts and Components and Ammunition was adopted to prevent and provide a
cooperative measure for illicit manufacturing of and trafficking in firearms,
their parts and components and ammunition. By adopting the protocol, the
member states commit to adopt domestic criminal offences for illegal
manufacturing, providing governmental licensing ammunition, and keeping track
of the ammunition.

#### United Nations Convention against Corruption

In its resolution 55/61, the General Assembly recognized that an effective
international legal instrument against corruption, independent of the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime was desirable. The
text of the convention was negotiated during seven sessions held between 21
January 2002 and 1 October 2003. The convention was adopted by the General
Assembly on 31 October 2003. In 2003, the United Nations adopted the UN
Convention against Corruption (UNCAC). The Convention came into force in
December 2005. As of 9 November 2012,[update] 140 countries had signed and 164
countries (States Parties) had ratified the UNCAC. UNODC serves as the
Secretariat for the Conference of the States Parties (CoSP) to the UNCAC.

UNCAC is a legally binding instrument (perhaps the only anti-corruption
legally binding global instrument). A highlight of UNCAC is the inclusion of a
specific chapter on asset recovery which aimed at returning assets to their
rightful owners including countries from which they had been taken illicitly.

UNODC, as the custodian of UNCAC, is also one of the main initiators of the
establishment of the International Anti-Corruption Academy (IACA), whose main
function is to, among other things, facilitate more effective implementation
of the UNCAC.

### Drug-related treaties

Timeline of the three drug-related treaties

There are three drug related treaties that guide UNODC's drug related
programs. These are: The Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961 as
amended by the 1972 Protocol; the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of
1971 and the United Nations Convention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988.

These three major international drug control treaties are mutually supportive
and complementary. An important purpose of the first two treaties is to codify
internationally applicable control measures in order to ensure the
availability of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances for medical and
scientific purposes, and to prevent their diversion into illicit channels.
They also include general provisions on trafficking and drug abuse.

## Campaigns

UNODC launches campaigns to raise awareness of drugs and crime problems. On 26
June every year, UNODC marks the International Day against Drug Abuse and
Illicit Trafficking. On 9 December every year, UNODC commemorates the
International Anti-Corruption Day.

### "Do Drugs Control Your Life?" – World Drug Campaign

The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) started this
international campaign to raise awareness about the major challenge that
illicit drugs represent to society as a whole, and especially to the young.
The goal of the campaign is to mobilize support and to inspire people to act
against drug abuse and trafficking. The campaign encourages young people to
put their health first and not to take drugs.

### "Your No Counts" – International Anti-Corruption Campaign

The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) has teamed up with the
United Nations Development Program (UNDP) to run this campaign as a focus on
how corruption hinders efforts to achieve the internationally agreed upon
MDGs, undermines democracy and the rule of law, leads to human rights
violations, distorts markets, erodes quality of life and allows organized
crime, terrorism and other threats to human security to flourish.

### "Think AIDS" – World AIDS Campaign

Young people aged 15 to 24 account for an estimated 40 per cent of new adult
(15+) HIV infections worldwide. In some parts of the world, and in some
marginalized sub-groups, the most frequent modes of HIV transmission for these
young people are unsafe injecting drug use and unsafe sexual activities.

Because young people are also often more likely to use drugs, The United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) targets this population with a
campaign to raise awareness about drug use and its connection to the spread of
HIV and AIDS. The slogan: "Think Before You Start ... Before You Shoot ...
Before You Share" is used to provoke young people to consider the implications
of using drugs, and particularly injecting drugs.

### Blue Heart Campaign Against Human Trafficking

The Blue Heart Campaign seeks to encourage involvement and action to help stop
trafficking in persons. The campaign also allows people to show solidarity
with the victims of human trafficking by wearing the Blue Heart. The use of
the blue UN colour demonstrates the commitment of the United Nations to combat
this crime.

## Criticism

In 2007, the five largest donors to UNODC's budget in descending order were:
European Union, Canada, United States, the UN itself, and Finland. According
to the Transnational Institute this explains why, until recently, UNODC did
not promote harm reduction policies like needle exchange and heroin-assisted
treatment. (This despite the actions of United Nations bodies (i.e. WHO and
UNAIDS), who support these policies.) UNODC promotes other methods for drug
use prevention, treatment and care that UNODC sees as "based on scientific
evidence and on ethical standards". The UNODC has been criticized by human
rights organizations such as Amnesty International for not promoting the
inclusion of adherence to international human rights standards within its
project in Iran, where there are "serious concerns regarding unfair trials and
executions of those suspected of drug offences."

UNODC has signed a partnership with the controversial Rule of Law and Anti-
Corruption Center, which was founded by Ali bin Fetais Al-Marri, the General-
Prosecutor of Qatar.