United Nations organization

| This article **relies excessively onreferences to primary sources**. Please
improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources.  
_Find sources:_ "United Nations Population Fund" – news **·** newspapers **·**
books **·** scholar **·** JSTOR _( May 2019)__(Learn how and when to remove
this message)_  
---|---  
  
A case like this was transferred through the humanitarian corridor in Gaza in
2024. The bag contained a galabia, sunscreen, soap and flip-flops. The UNFPA
logo is printed on the case

The **United Nations Population Fund** (**UNFPA**) is a UN agency aimed at
improving reproductive and maternal health worldwide. Its work includes
developing national healthcare strategies and protocols, increasing access to
birth control, and leading campaigns against child marriage, gender-based
violence, obstetric fistula, and female genital mutilation.

The UNFPA supports programs in more than 144 countries across four geographic
regions: Arab States and Europe, Asia and the Pacific, Latin America, the
Caribbean and Africa. Around three-quarters of the staff work in the field. It
is a founding member of the United Nations Development Group, a collection of
UN agencies and programmes focused on fulfilling the Sustainable Development
Goals.

## Origins

In December 1966, 12 heads of state made a declaration urging the United
Nations to work on population issues. The Secretary-General created a trust
fund for population in 1967. The agency began operations in 1969 as the
**United Nations Fund for Population Activities** under the administration of
the United Nations Development Fund. In 1971 it was placed under the authority
of the United Nations General Assembly. Its name was changed into **United
Nations Population Fund** in 1987. However, the shortened term of **UNFPA**
has been retained.

## UNFPA: Strategic outlook

### Sustainable Development Goals

In September 2015, the 193 member states of the United Nations unanimously
adopted the Sustainable Development Goals, a set of 17 goals aiming to
transform the world over the next 15 years. These goals are designed to
eliminate poverty, discrimination, abuse and preventable deaths, address
environmental destruction, and usher in an era of development for all people,
everywhere.

UNFPA stated the Sustainable Development Goals are ambitious, and they will
require enormous efforts across countries, continents, industries and
disciplines, but they are achievable. UNFPA works with governments, partners
and other UN agencies to directly tackle many of these goals – in particular
Goal 3 on health, Goal 4 on education and Goal 5 on gender equality – and
contributes in a variety of ways to achieving many of the other goals.

### Warning on declining fertility

In June 2025, UNFPA issued a report, based on a survey of 14,000 people in 14
countries, warning of a decline in fertility. "The world has begun an
unprecedented decline in fertility rates," said Dr Natalia Kanem, head of
UNFPA. The causes of people having less children than they wanted included the
high cost of child care.

Countries surveyed included USA, Sweden, Brazil, India, Indonesia, Morocco,
South Africa, and Nigeria, a mix of low, middle and high-income countries,
which amounted to a third of the global population. Professor Stuart Gietel-
Basten, demographer at the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology,
said "This is the first time that [the UN] have really gone all-out on low
fertility issues."

## Leadership

Executive Directors and Under-Secretaries-General of the UNFPA:

| Executive Director  | Country | Period   
---|---|---|---  
1  | Rafael M. Salas |  Philippines | 1969–1987   
2  | Nafis Sadik |  Pakistan | 1987–2000   
3  | Thoraya Ahmed Obaid [ar] |  Saudi Arabia | 2001–2010   
4  | Babatunde Osotimehin |  Nigeria | 2011–2017   
5  | Natalia Kanem |  Panama | 2017–present   
  
## Areas of work

UNFPA is the world's largest multilateral source of funding for population and
reproductive health programs. The Fund works with governments and non-
governmental organizations in over 150 countries with the support of the
international community, supporting programs that help women, men and young
people:

  * voluntarily plan and have the number of children they desire and to avoid unwanted pregnancies
  * undergo safe pregnancy and childbirth
  * avoid spreading sexually transmitted infections
  * decrease violence against women
  * increase the equality of women
  * encouraging the use of birth control

UNFPA uses a human rights-based approach in programming to address three
"transformative goals":

  1. Zero preventable maternal death
  2. Zero gender-based violence
  3. Zero unmet need for family planning.

The Fund raises awareness of and supports efforts to meet these goals,
advocates close attention to population concerns and helps nations formulate
policies and strategies in support of sustainable development. Osotimehin
assumed leadership in January 2011. The Fund is also represented by UNFPA
Goodwill Ambassadors and a Patron.

### How it works

UNFPA works in partnership with governments, along with other United Nations
agencies, communities, NGOs, foundations and the private sector, to raise
awareness and mobilize the support and resources needed to achieve its mission
to promote the rights and health of women and young people. For instance, it
is one of the co-sponsors of the Special Programme on Human Reproduction.

Contributions from governments and the private sector to UNFPA in 2016 totaled
$848 million. The amount includes $353 million for the organization's core
resources and $495 million earmarked for specific programs and initiatives. As
a result of the economic impact of coronavirus pandemic, the United Kingdom
imposed 85% aid cut to UNFPA.

Examples of campaigns:

### Campaign to end fistula

  * This UNFPA-led global campaign works to prevent obstetric fistula, a devastating and socially isolating injury of childbirth, to treat women who live with the condition and help those who have been treated to return to their communities. The campaign works in more than 40 countries in Africa, the Arab States and South Asia.
  * The leader of the campaign to end fistula, Erin Anastasi, decided to start this campaign in 2003 in hopes of ending the deaths of new mothers after developing fistula. This campaign is now active in over 50 countries working not only to prevent fistula but also to give fistula survivors a sense of reforming their life after overcoming this burden. Nearly 800 women in Africa and Asia die after childbirth and more than 2 million young women live with untreated obstetric fistula in Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa. The campaign focuses mainly on providing training and funds to support women living with fistula, and also programs aimed towards survivors. The campaign is also looking at ways to prevent fistula from developing in general by providing medical supplies and technical guidance and support.

### Ending female genital mutilation

  * UNFPA has worked for many years to end the practice of female genital mutilation, the partial or total removal of external female genital organs for cultural or other non-medical reasons. The practice, which affects 100–140 million women and girls across the world, violates their right to health and bodily integrity. In 2007, UNFPA in partnership with UNICEF, launched a $44 million program to reduce the practice by 40 per cent in 16 countries by 2015 and to end it within a generation. UNFPA also recently sponsored a Global Technical Consultation, which drew experts from all over the world to discuss strategies to convince communities to abandon the practice. UNFPA supports the campaign to end female genital mutilation with _The Guardian_.

## Relations with the US government

UNFPA has been accused by American pro-life groups of providing support for
government programs which have promoted forced abortions and coercive
sterilizations. UNFPA says it "does not provide support for abortion
services". Its charter includes a strong statement condemning coercion. In
response to these allegations, the U.S. Congress passed the Kemp-Kasten
amendment in 1985 to empower the president to block U.S. funding of programs
deemed by the president to include "coercive abortion or involuntary
sterilization". Since its passage, all Republican presidents (Reagan, H.W.
Bush, W. Bush, and Trump) have withheld funding from the UNFPA – a policy
known as the Mexico City Policy.

UNFPA provided aid to Peru's reproductive health program in the mid-to-late
1990s. When it was discovered a Peruvian program had been engaged in carrying
out coercive sterilizations, UNFPA called for reforms and protocols to protect
the rights of women seeking assistance. UNFPA continued work with the country
after the abuses had become public to help end the abuses and reform laws and
practices.

Over the course of the George W. Bush administration, a total of $244 million
in Congressionally approved funding was blocked by the Executive Branch. From
2002 through 2008, the administration denied funding to UNFPA that had already
been allocated by the US Congress, on the grounds that the UNFPA supported
Chinese government programs which include forced abortions and coercive
sterilizations. In a letter from the Under Secretary of State for Political
Affairs Nicholas Burns to Congress, the administration said it had determined
that UNFPA's support for China's population program "facilitates its
government's coercive abortion program", thus violating the Kemp-Kasten
Amendment, which bans the use of United States aid to finance organizations
that support or take part in managing a program of coercive abortion or
sterilization.

The notion that UNFPA had any connection to China's administration of forced
abortions was deemed to be unsubstantiated by investigations carried out by
various US, UK, and UN teams sent to examine UNFPA activities in China.
Specifically, a three-person US State Department fact-finding team was sent on
a two-week tour throughout China. It wrote in its report that it found "no
evidence that UNFPA has supported or participated in the management of a
program of coercive abortion or involuntary sterilization in China," as has
been charged by critics.

However, according to then-Secretary of State Colin Powell, the UNFPA
contributed vehicles and computers to the Chinese to carry out their
population planning policies. However, both _The Washington Post_ and _The
Washington Times_ reported that Powell simply fell in line, signing a brief
written by someone else.

Colin Powell at the United Nations

US Representative Chris Smith criticized the State Department investigation,
saying the investigators were shown "Potemkin Villages" where residents had
been intimidated into lying about the family-planning program. Nafis Sadik,
former director of UNFPA, said her agency had been pivotal in reversing
China's coercive population planning methods, but a 2005 report by Amnesty
International and a separate report by the US State Department found that
coercive techniques were still regularly employed by the Chinese, casting
doubt upon Sadik's statements. However, Amnesty International found no
evidence that UNFPA had supported the coercion.

A 2001 study conducted by the pro-life Population Research Institute claimed
that the UNFPA shared an office with the Chinese family planning officials who
were carrying out forced abortions. "We located the family planning offices,
and in that family planning office, we located the UNFPA office, and we
confirmed from family planning officials there that there is no distinction
between what the UNFPA does and what the Chinese Family Planning Office does,"
said Scott Weinberg, a spokesman for PRI. However, United Nations Members
disagreed and approved UNFPA's new country programme in January 2006. The more
than 130 members of the "Group of 77" developing countries in the United
Nations expressed support for the UNFPA programmes. In addition, speaking for
several European democracies – Norway, Denmark, Sweden, Finland, the
Netherlands, France, Belgium, Switzerland and Germany – the United Kingdom
stated, "UNFPA’s activities in China, as in the rest of the world, are in
strict conformity with the unanimously adopted Programme of Action of the
ICPD" and plays "a key role in supporting our common endeavour, the promotion
and protection of all human rights and fundamental freedoms".

In response, the EU decided to fill the gap left behind by the US under the
Sandbæk Report. According to its Annual Report for 2008, the UNFPA received
its funding mainly from European governments: Of the total income of $845.3
million, $118 million was donated by the Netherlands, $67 million by Sweden,
$62 million by Norway, $54 million by Denmark, $53 million by the UK, $52
million by Spain, and $19 million by Luxembourg. The European Commission
donated a further $36 million. The most important non-European donor state was
Japan, which gave $36 million. The number of donors exceeded 180 in one year.

In the United States, nonprofit organizations like Friends of UNFPA, formerly
Americans for UNFPA, worked to compensate for the loss of United States
federal funding by raising private donations.

In January 2009 President Barack Obama restored US funding to UNFPA, saying in
a public statement that he would "look forward to working with Congress to
restore U.S. financial support for the U.N. Population Fund. By resuming
funding to UNFPA, the U.S. will be joining 180 other donor nations working
collaboratively to reduce poverty, improve the health of women and children,
prevent HIV/AIDS and provide family planning assistance to women in 154
countries."

The United States said during the UNDP/UNFPA/UNOPS Executive Board meeting
that considered the China programme in 2015:

> During its recent visit, the U.S. delegation observed the positive impact of
> UNFPA's rights-based programming in China. We commend the Fund's adherence
> to demonstrating the advantages of a voluntary approach to family planning
> and were pleased to see – in support of its ICPD commitments – increased
> provider emphasis on patient rights.

In April 2017, the Trump administration announced that it will cut off funding
to UNFPA, on the grounds that it "supports, or participates in the management
of, a program of coercive abortion or involuntary sterilization." UNFPA
refuted this claim, as all of its work promotes the human rights of
individuals and couples to make their own decisions, free of coercion or
discrimination.

## Other UN population agencies and entities

Entities with competencies about population in the United Nations:

  * Commission on Population and Development
  * United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs