UN agency to protect and support refugees

The **Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees**
(**UNHCR**) is a United Nations agency mandated to aid and protect refugees,
forcibly displaced communities, and stateless people, and to assist in their
voluntary repatriation, local integration or resettlement to a third country.
It is headquartered in Geneva, Switzerland, and has 20,305 staff working in
136 countries as of December 2023.

## Background

The office of High Commissioner for Refugees has existed since 1921, when it
was created by the League of Nations with Norwegian scientist Fridtjof Nansen
as its first occupant.

The International Refugee Organization (IRO) was created in 1946 to address
the refugee crisis that resulted from World War II. The United Nations
established the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in
1950 as the successor of the IRO. The 1951 Refugee Convention established the
scope and legal framework of the agency's work, which initially focused on
Europeans uprooted by the war. Beginning in the late 1950s, displacement
caused by other conflicts, from the Hungarian Uprising to the decolonization
of Africa and Asia, broadened the scope of UNHCR's operations. Commensurate
with the 1967 Protocol to the Refugee Convention, which expanded the
geographic and temporal scope of refugee assistance, UNHCR operated across the
world, with the bulk of its activities in developing countries. By its 65th
anniversary in 2015, the agency had assisted more than 50 million refugees
worldwide.

As of June 2020, UNHCR has over 20 million refugees under its mandate.
Consequently, its annual budget has grown from US$300,000 in 1951 to US$8.6
billion in 2019, making it one of the largest UN agencies by expenditure. The
vast majority of UNHCR's budget comes from voluntary contributions, mostly
from member states; the largest donors are the United States, the European
Union, and Germany. The agency's work includes providing protection, shelter,
healthcare and emergency relief, assisting in resettlement and repatriation,
and advocating for national and multilateral policies on behalf of refugees.

In recognition of its work, UNHCR has won two Nobel Peace Prizes, in 1954 and
1981, and a Prince of Asturias Awards for International Cooperation in 1991.
It is a member of the United Nations Development Group, a consortium of
organizations dedicated to sustainable development.

## History

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

Following the demise of the League of Nations and the creation of the United
Nations the international community was acutely aware of the refugee crisis
following the end of World War II. In 1947, the International Refugee
Organization (IRO) was founded by the United Nations. The IRO was the first
international agency to deal comprehensively with all aspects of refugees'
lives. Preceding this was the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation
Administration, which was established in 1944 to address the millions of
people displaced across Europe as a result of World War II.

In the late 1940s, the IRO fell out of favour, but the UN agreed that a body
was required to oversee global refugee issues. Despite many heated debates in
the General Assembly, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees was
founded as a subsidiary organ of the General Assembly by Resolution 319 (IV)
of the United Nations General Assembly of December 1949. However, the
organisation was only intended to operate for 3 years, from January 1951, due
to the disagreement of many UN member states over the implications of a
permanent body.

UNHCR's mandate was originally set out in its statute, annexed to resolution
428 (V) of the United Nations General Assembly of 1950. This mandate has been
subsequently broadened by numerous resolutions of the General Assembly and its
Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC). According to UNHCR, its mandate is to
provide, on a non-political and humanitarian basis, international protection
to refugees and to seek permanent solutions for them.

Soon after the signing of the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of
Refugees, it became clear that refugees were not solely restricted to Europe.
In 1956, UNHCR was involved in coordinating the response to the uprising in
Hungary. Just a year later, UNHCR was tasked with dealing with Chinese
refugees in Hong Kong, while also responding to Algerian refugees who had fled
to Morocco and Tunisia in the wake of Algeria's war for independence. The
responses marked the beginning of a wider, global mandate in refugee
protection and humanitarian assistance.

Decolonisation in the 1960s triggered large refugee movements in Africa,
creating a massive challenge that would transform UNHCR; unlike the refugee
crises in Europe, there were no durable solutions in Africa, and many refugees
who fled one country only found instability in their new country of refuge. By
the end of the decade, two-thirds of UNHCR's budget was focused on operations
in Africa, and in just one decade, the organization's focus had shifted from
an almost exclusive focus on Europe.

In 1967, the Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees was ratified to
remove the geographical and temporal restrictions of UNHCR under the 1951
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees. As the Convention was confined
to the refugee crisis in the aftermath of World War II in Europe, the Protocol
was made to address the "new refugee situations that have arisen since the
Convention was adopted and the refugees concerned that may therefore not fall
within the scope of the Convention".

In the 1970s, UNHCR refugee operations continued to spread around the globe,
with the mass exodus of East Pakistanis to India shortly before the birth of
Bangladesh. Adding to the woes in Asia was the Vietnam War, with millions
fleeing Laos, Cambodia, and Vietnam. The 1980s saw new challenges for UNHCR,
with many member states unwilling to resettle refugees due to the sharp rise
in refugee numbers over the 1970s. Often, these refugees were not fleeing wars
between states, but inter-ethnic conflict in newly independent states. The
targeting of civilians as military strategy added to the displacement in many
nations, so even "minor" conflicts could result in a large number of displaced
persons. Whether in Asia, Central America or Africa, these conflicts, fueled
by superpower rivalry and aggravated by socio-economic problems within the
concerned countries, durable solutions continued to prove a massive challenge
for the UNHCR. As a result, the UNHCR became more heavily involved with
assistance programs within refugee camps, often located in hostile
environments.

The end of the Cold War marked continued inter-ethnic conflict and contributed
heavily to refugee flight. In addition, humanitarian intervention by
multinational forces became more frequent, and the media began to play a big
role, particularly in the lead up to the 1999 NATO mission in FR Yugoslavia,
while by contrast, the 1994 Rwandan Genocide had little attention. The
genocide in Rwanda caused a massive refugee crisis, again highlighting the
difficulties for UNHCR to uphold its mandate, and the UNHCR continued to
battle against restrictive refugee policies in so-called "rich" nations.

According to a 2021 study, the UNHCR has fulfilled its mandate to serve
refugees independent of their location consistently over time. The
organization has shown limited bias towards donors in the geographical
distribution of its funds.

## Function

UNHCR packages containing tents, tarps, and mosquito netting sit in a field in
Dadaab, Kenya, on 11 December 2006, following disastrous flooding

UNHCR was established on 14 December 1950 and succeeded the earlier United
Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration. The agency is mandated to
lead and co-ordinate international action to protect refugees (other than
Palestinian refugees, who are assisted by UNRWA) and resolve refugee problems
worldwide. Its primary purpose is to safeguard the rights and well-being of
refugees. It strives to ensure that everyone can exercise the right to seek
asylum and find safe refuge in another state, with the option to return home
voluntarily, integrate locally or to resettle in a third country.

UNHCR's mandate has gradually been expanded to include protecting and
providing humanitarian assistance to whom it describes as other persons "of
concern", including internally displaced persons (IDPs) who would fit the
legal definition of a refugee under the 1951 United Nations Convention
Relating to the Status of Refugees and 1967 Protocol, the 1969 Organization
for African Unity Convention, or some other treaty if they left their country,
but who presently remain in their country of origin. UNHCR presently has major
missions in Lebanon, South Sudan, Chad/Darfur, Democratic Republic of Congo,
Iraq, Afghanistan, and Kenya to assist and provide services to IDPs and
refugees in camps and in urban settings.

UNHCR maintains a database of refugee information, ProGres, which was created
during the Kosovo War in the 1990s. The database today contains data on over
11 million refugees, or about 11% of all displaced persons globally. The
database contains biometric data, including fingerprints and iris scans and is
used to determine aid distribution for recipients. The results of using
biometric verification have been successful. When introduced in Kenyan refugee
camps of Kakuma and Dadaab in the year 2013, the UN World Food Programme was
able to eliminate $1.4M in waste and fraud.

To achieve its mandate, the UNHCR engages in activities both in the countries
of interest and in countries with donors. This includes hosting "expert
roundtables" to discuss issues of concern to the international refugee
community.

### Palestine refugee mandate

Palestinian refugees living in the areas of Jordan, Lebanon, Syria, the Gaza
Strip and the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, are covered by the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA). Unlike UNHCR, UNRWA does not have a mandate to resettle Palestine
refugees and has no authority to seek lasting durable solutions for refugees.

### Public awareness and future of refugees

UNHCR 50th anniversary. Stamp of Tajikistan, 2001.

Several new programs have recently been introduced to support and to heighten
awareness of the issues faced by refugees around the world. These two new
programs are a product of the benchmarks set out by the United Nations
Millennium Development Goals.

The UNHCR works in different regions of the world to raise awareness about the
refugee crisis and the needs of these refugees.

Since 2009, the UNHCR acknowledged a large presence of migration and refugees
in the Caribbean, where the refugee crisis remained largely unreported. The
issue stems from refugees who, instead of applying to the U.N., improperly
search for asylum in the United States, ultimately failing to reach their
destination and remaining in the Caribbean. However, migrant laws in some of
these nations lacked any protections for asylum seekers, including the ability
to be recognized as such. In response, the UNHCR organized talks with these
nations in Costa Rica in 2009, seeking to address the lack of protections for
refugees and their prosecution as unauthorized migrants. A refugee seeker
applies through the U.N. for placement, and an asylum seeker applies within
the Country in which asylum is sought. This is why some Countries label
refugees as illegal when they did not apply through the U.N. for placement and
entered the country unlawfully.

In 2007, UNHCR offices in Canada launched an aggressive media campaign to shed
light on the plight of refugees. This campaign was meant to humanize the
refugee crisis by showing refugees living in the midst of disturbing
conditions. Using emotional appeals to raise public awareness, the campaign
hoped to increase the interest of particularly "30 to 45-year-old
professionals who are generally well educated, well-read, but have not had
direct experience or knowledge of refugee issues", according to fund-raising
officer Jonathan Wade.

In Ireland, the UNHCR works to inform the public through different channels.
The UNHCR in Ireland actively pursues media relations. It also holds public
events with the aim of informing people about current refugee crises. One of
these is the annual UNHCR/SARI Fair play Football Cup.

The UNHCR was prominent in helping Syrian refugees in Lebanon. When the
Lebanese government was unable to withstand the influx of refugees, the UNHCR
stepped in and eased the displacement for the refugees mainly by offering food
and healthcare. They also helped register the refugees, so they would not be
considered illegal in the eyes of the Lebanese government. Many Syrian
refugees are also in Jordan.

### Cooperation within the United Nations

As UNHCR is a programme governed by the UN General Assembly and the UN
Economic and Social Council, it cooperates with many other programs and
agencies under the United Nations in order to effectively protect the rights
of refugees.

On 19 September 2016, the UN General Assembly hosted the UN Summit for
Refugees and Migrants, a high-level summit to address large movements of
refugees and migrants, with the aim of bringing countries together behind a
more humane and coordinated approach. Leaders of the UN High Commissioner for
Human Rights, UN Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women, UN
Office on Drugs and Crime, and the World Bank were present. The summit
addressed the root causes and drive for migration and the necessity of global
cooperation. As a result of this summit, the United Nations unveiled a draft
set of principles that urge the international community to build on the
momentum set by the adoption of the New York Declaration for Refugees and
Migrants (2016). Specifically, the 20 draft principles focus on human rights;
non-discrimination; rescue and assistance; access to justice; border
governance; returns; violence; detention; family unity; child migrants; women
migrants; right to health; adequate standard of living; decent work; right to
education; right to information; monitoring and accountability; migrants’
human rights defenders; data; and international cooperation. The declaration
set off a process leading to the negotiation of the Global Compact for
Migration.

On 28 September 2016, the UNHCR partnered with the UN Food and Agriculture
Organization in Tehran for the Solutions Strategy for Afghan Refugees. FAO
highlighted the contributions to be made by FAO towards SSAR objectives on
livelihood related activities including livestock and fishery initiatives as
well as nutritional projects in Iranian schools.

FAO and UNHCR are committed to increasing refugees’ access to livelihood
opportunities and reducing dependency on humanitarian aid. Of late, a joint
livelihood strategy for South Sudan was launched, looking to address this
issue with a clearly defined action plan. The strategy targets both refugees
(70%) and local communities (30%) in refugee-hosting areas across the country.

### Aid transparency

UNHCR regularly publishes to the International Aid Transparency Initiative
(IATI) using the identifier XM-DAC-41121. Publication started in 2018, but
data is available from 2016 onwards aligning to the Grand Bargain
(humanitarian reform). The organisation was assessed by Publish What You Fund
and included in the 2024 Aid Transparency Index with an overall score of 63.4
which is categorised as a "good" score.

### Awards

Since 1954, the UNHCR Nansen Refugee Award has been annually awarded to a
person or an organization in recognition of outstanding service to the cause
of refugees, displaced or stateless people.

The UNHCR itself was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1954 and 1981. The UNHCR
was awarded the Indira Gandhi Prize in 2015.

In 1991 was awarded the Prince of Asturias Award for International
Cooperation.

  * Refugee camp in Darfur (Chad)

  * A helicopter arrives at a refugee facility in Macedonia with an underslung load of aid.

  * Trucks loaded with supplies drive across the border from Turkey into Iraq to take part in Operation Provide Comfort, a multinational effort to aid Kurdish refugees.

  * An UNHCR-officer talks with a Marine during Exercise Eager Lion 12.

  * Workers from the UNHCR, and CARE International gather bundles of shelters and mosquito nets in Kenya.

  * Heavily fortified UNHCR offices in Somaliland

  * A UNHCR refugee camp at Baharka, Iraq

  * UNHCR Camp, Kurdistan (Northern Iraq) June 2014

  * UNHCR Camp, Kurdistan (Northern Iraq) June 2014

  * Inside the refugee camps of Northern Iraq

## Persons of concern to UNHCR

Persons of concern include refugees and asylum seekers, people in refugee-like
conditions, internally displaced people (IDPs), stateless persons and "others
of concern to the UNHCR".

The UNHCR's Mid-Year Trends report of June 2015 (based on information for
mid-2015 or latest available information up to that date) reported an
"unprecedented" 57,959,702 individuals falling under its mandate (for
reference, on 1 January 2007, 21,018,589 people – or less than half of the
number in 2015 – fell under the mandate of the UNHCR). The sharp increase was
mainly attributed to the Syrian Civil War, "with the outbreak of armed crises
or the deterioration of ongoing ones in countries like Afghanistan, Burundi,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali, Somalia, South Sudan and the Ukraine
contributing to prevailing trends".

### 2019

10,000,000

20,000,000

30,000,000

40,000,000

50,000,000

60,000,000

70,000,000

80,000,000

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

Refugees (incl. refugee-like situations)

Asylum seekers (pending cases)

Returned refugees

Internally displaced persons (IDPs)

Returned IDPs

Stateless persons

Others of concern

  
2023's Global Trends report states that 43.4 million refugees fell under the
organization's mandate, with 73 percent of refugees originating from just five
countries: Afghanistan, Syria, Sudan, Ukraine, and Venezuela.

Aerial view of Zaatari refugee camp for Syrian refugees in Jordan, July 2013

Prior data on forced migration organized by georegion included a report by the
organization in 2015. It lists:

  * 16,796,426 in the Middle East and North Africa, of which 
    * 2,941,121 are refugees
    * 64,166 are in refugee-like situations
    * 109,847 have pending asylum cases
    * 374,309 are stateless ("persons not considered as nationals by any state")
    * 13,297,101 are IDPs or people in IDP-like situations assisted by the UNHCR
  * 9,694,535 in the Asia and Pacific bureau, of which 
    * 3,506,644 are refugees
    * 278,350 are in refugee-like situations
    * 133,894 have pending asylum cases
    * 1,801,802 are stateless ("persons not considered as nationals by any state")
    * 2,965,211 are IDPs or people in IDP-like situations assisted by the UNHCR
  * 8,451,275 in East and Horn of Africa, of which 
    * 2,713,748 are refugees
    * 33,553 are in refugee-like situations
    * 108,016 have pending asylum cases
    * 233,726 are stateless ("persons not considered as nationals by any state"
    * 5,119,463 are IDPs or people in IDP-like situations assisted by the UNHCR
  * 7,726,594 in the Americas, of which 
    * 501,049 are refugees
    * 251,888 are in refugee-like situations
    * 276,394 have pending asylum cases
    * 136,413 are stateless ("persons not considered as nationals by any state")
    * 6,520,270 are IDPs or people in IDP-like situations assisted by the UNHCR
  * 7,585,581 in Europe, of which 
    * 3,506,644 are refugees
    * 14,261 are in refugee-like situations
    * 827,374 are asylum seekers
    * 610,532 are stateless ("persons not considered as nationals by any state")
    * 2,574,886 are IDPs or people in IDP-like situations assisted by the UNHCR
  * 3,580,181 in Central Africa–Great Lakes, of which 
    * 865,112 are refugees
    * 13,741 are in refugee-like situations
    * 18,623 have pending asylum cases
    * 1,302 are stateless ("persons not considered as nationals by any state"
    * 2,021,269 are IDPs or people in IDP-like situations assisted by the UNHCR
  * 2,754,893 in Western Africa of which 
    * 258,893 are refugees
    * (Information not applicable/unavailable) on number in refugee-like situations
    * 9,298 have pending asylum cases
    * 700,116 are stateless ("persons not considered as nationals by any state")
    * 1,549,516 are IDPs or people in IDP-like situations assisted by the UNHCR
  * 1,370,217 in Southern Africa, of which 
    * 179,837 are refugees
    * (Information not applicable/unavailable) on number in refugee-like situations
    * 860,500 have pending asylum cases
    * 300,000 are stateless ("persons not considered as nationals by any state")
    * (Information not applicable/unavailable) on number of IDPs or people in IDP-like situations assisted by the UNHCR

## Staffing

As of 2023[update], the UNHCR has employed more than 18,879 staff in 138
countries.

### High Commissioners

The UN General Assembly elects High Commissioners every five years. High
Commissioners are supported by the "Executive Committee to the High
Commissioner's Programme", and he or she has to make annual reports to the UN
General Assembly and needs to follow their directives. The current High
Commissioner is Filippo Grandi, who has held the post since 1 January 2016.
Prior to the establishment of the UNHCR, Fridtjof Nansen was the League's High
Commissioner for Refugees. The post of High Commissioner has been held by:

No. | Portrait  | High Commissioner | Took office | Left office | Time in office | Nationality   
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
0|  | Nansen, Fridtjof**Fridtjof Nansen**  
(1861–1930)  
League of Nations High Commissioner| 1 September 1921| 1927| 4–5 years|
Norway  
1|  | Goedhart, Gerrit Jan van Heuven**Gerrit Jan van Heuven Goedhart**  
(1901–1956)| 1 January 1951| 8 July 1956| 5 years, 189 days|  Netherlands  
2|  | Lindt, August R.**August R. Lindt**  
(1905–2000)| 8 July 1956| 3 November 1960| 4 years, 118 days|  Switzerland  
3|  | Schnyder, Félix**Félix Schnyder**  
(1910–1992)| 3 November 1960| 31 December 1965| 5 years, 58 days|  Switzerland  
4|  | Khan, Sadruddin Aga**Sadruddin Aga Khan**  
(1933–2003)| 1 January 1966| 31 December 1977| 11 years, 364 days|  Iran  
5|  | Hartling, Poul**Poul Hartling**  
(1914–2000)| 1 January 1978| 31 December 1985| 7 years, 364 days|  Denmark  
6|  | Hocké, Jean-Pierre**Jean-Pierre Hocké**  
(born 1938)| 1 January 1986| 31 December 1989| 3 years, 364 days|  Switzerland  
7|  | Stoltenberg, Thorvald**Thorvald Stoltenberg**  
(1931–2018)| 1 January 1990| 3 November 1990| 306 days|  Norway  
8|  | Ogata, Sadako**Sadako Ogata**  
(1927–2019)| 3 November 1990| 31 December 2000| 10 years, 59 days|  Japan  
9|  | Lubbers, Ruud**Ruud Lubbers**  
(1939–2018)  
(Resigned due to internal investigation)| 1 January 2001| 20 February 2005| 4
years, 50 days|  Netherlands  
–|  | Chamberlin, Wendy**Wendy Chamberlin**  
(born 1948)  
_Acting_|  24 February 2005| 2 June 2005| 98 days|  United States  
10|  | Guterres, António**António Guterres**  
(born 1949)| 2 June 2005| 31 December 2015| 10 years, 212 days|  Portugal  
11|  | Grandi, Filippo**Filippo Grandi**  
(born 1957)| 1 January 2016|  _Incumbent_|  9 years, 223 days|  Italy  
  
### Special Envoy of High Commissioner Filippo Grandi

  * Angelina Jolie

After 10 years serving as a Goodwill Ambassador, Angelina Jolie was promoted
in 2012 to Special Envoy to the High Commissioner. In this role she represents
the UNHCR and High Commissioner Filipo Grandi at the diplomatic level and
works to facilitate long-term solutions for people displaced by large-scale
crises, such as Afghanistan and Somalia. "This is an exceptional position
reflecting an exceptional role she has played for us", said a UNHCR spokesman.

### Goodwill ambassadors

UNHCR is also represented by a number of UNHCR Goodwill Ambassadors, who at
present are:

  * Barbara Hendricks (Honorary Lifetime Goodwill Ambassador)
  * Cate Blanchett
  * David Morrissey
  * Neil Gaiman
  * Yao Chen
  * Julien Clerc
  * George Dalaras
  * Alessandro Gassman
  * Khaled Hosseini
  * Kristin Davis
  * Adel Emam
  * Ger Duany
  * Rokia Traore
  * Osvaldo Laport
  * Jesús Vázquez
  * Alek Wek
  * Jung Woo-sung
  * Praya Lundberg
  * John Abraham
  * Yusra Mardini
  * Sheikha Rima al-Sabah
  * Iskui Abalyan
  * Atom Araullo
  * Alphonso Davies
  * Tahsan Rahman Khan

Previous ambassadors include:

  * Muazzez Ersoy
  * Richard Burton
  * Nazia Hassan
  * James Mason
  * Sophia Loren

## Controversies

### The 1994–1995 repatriation of Rohingyans

According to some scholars, with time UNHCR left an initial preference for
asylum and resettlement policies, tending to prefer repatriation measures of
refugees instead. Sometimes, this might have led the agency's bureaucratic
apparatus to adopt pathological behaviours.

An example of the latter, according to Barnett and Finnemore, was the handling
of the 1995 Rohingyan crisis. At the time, thousands of Rohingyans were
fleeing Burma (or Myanmar), seeking shelter in UNHCR camps in Bangladesh.
According to some,[_who?_] UNHCR has been decisive in promoting the
repatriation of refugees, although Non-Governmental Organizations on the field
and the UN were skeptical about better political and security conditions in
Burma.

Also, controversies arose on the methods with which the UNHCR staff was
conducting surveys in the camps to establish whether refugees were willing to
move back to Burma or not.

### Regime complexity

A paper published in the International Migration review puts forward the point
that since the organization’s creation in 1951, overlapping and competing
organizations have been created. The paper highlights that this creates
opportunities in the form of inter-organization cooperation, but also
challenges in that most of the UNHCR's original role becomes offloaded onto
other agencies.

### Uyghur refugees

In 2024, UNHCR was criticized for being unable or willing to intervene in
refugee cases involving Uyghurs.

### Stateless people

Despite UNHCR being known as an international lead on addressing
statelessness, the organization's work with stateless people remains limited.
According to UNHCR's own evaluation report from 2021, "the only dedicated
training on statelessness within UNHCR is an online self-study module that was
developed in 2012 (now out of date) which has been complemented by other ad
hoc external training. This patchwork of training and learning support may not
be able to ensure growing demands for capacity, and inadequately target staff
in different functions and at different levels of responsibility within the
organization." According to the same report, UNHCR remains risk-averse in
advocating for stateless people, and the organization's communications on
statelessness remains poor "due to lack of staff familiarity, perceived
complexity of statelessness issues, and staff not having direct contact with
stateless populations to help develop a better understanding of their
situation."