Space agency

UNOOSA's headquarters are located at the United Nations Office at Vienna

The **United Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs** (**UNOOSA**) is an
office of the U.N. Secretariat that promotes and facilitates peaceful
international cooperation in outer space. It works to establish or strengthen
the legal and regulatory frameworks for space activities, and assists
developing countries in using space science and technology for sustainable
socioeconomic development.

The Office was established in 1958 to assist and advise the _ad hoc_ Committee
on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (COPUOS), which was established by the UN
General Assembly to discuss the scientific and legal aspects of exploring and
using outer space to benefit humankind. The Committee became permanent the
following year, with UNOOSA undergoing several structural changes before its
relocation in 1993 to the United Nations Office in Vienna, Austria.

As the secretariat of COPUOS, the Office is responsible for helping implement
the major international treaties, legal principles, and General Assembly
resolutions that together comprise space law. Other duties include advising
governments and nongovernmental organizations on space law; maintaining a
registry of vessels and objects launched into space; convening forums to
discuss various space-related matters; and sponsoring programmes that provide
access to space technology.

## History

In 1957, the launching of _Sputnik 1_ prompted a global conversation and
debate on the legal, scientific, and political implications of space
exploration.

On 13 December 1958, the _ad hoc_ Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space (COPUOS) was established by the General Assembly in its resolution 1348
(XIII), becoming a permanent body within the General Assembly. They soon met
for the first time to discuss a peaceful and legally ordered approach to space
exploration. Concurrently, the United Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs
(UNOOSA) was created as a small expert unit within the UN Secretariat in New
York to assist the Committee in its work.

In 1962, UNOOSA was moved to the Department of Political and Security Council
Affairs (DPSCA), where it was transformed into the Outer Space Affairs
Division.

In 1967, the Outer Space Treaty, which had been developed by COPUOS, entered
into force, creating the first international legal framework governing the
conduct of space activities.

In 1992, the Outer Space Affairs Division changed to its current form as the
Office for Outer Space Affairs, remaining within Department for Political
Affairs and Peacebuilding (which succeeded the DPSCA). The following year,
UNOOSA was relocated to its current headquarters at the United Nations Office
at Vienna.

At the start of the 21st century, UNOOSA undertook initiatives and programs to
fulfill its mandate of promoting widespread and peaceful international
involvement in space. In 2005, the International Committee on Global
Navigation Satellite Systems (ICG) was established to promote compatibility,
interoperability and transparency between all the satellite navigation
systems, particularly for developing nations. The following year, the UN-
SPIDER programme was created to provide an accessible platform for developing
states to use space-based technologies for disaster management and emergency
response. Two offices were established (in Bonn, Germany and Beijing, China)
to further the programme's work.

In 2009, Japanese astronaut Takao Doi became Chief of Space Applications.

In 2010, the Human Space Initiative was launched to further UNOOSA's mission
of providing developing countries with access to the use and exploration of
space.

In March 2014, the UN Secretary-General appointed Simonetta Di Pippo of Italy
as Director of the Office, who had previously served as Director of Human
Spaceflight at the European Space Agency.

In September 2015, pursuant to the Human Space Initiative, UNOOSA partnered
with the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) to launch the "KiboCUBE"
programme, which allows developing countries to deploy their own indigenously
produced CubeSats from the Japanese Kibo module on the International Space
Station. Through the programme, Kenya and Guatemala launched their first
satellites in 2018 and 2020, respectively.

On 16 June 2016, UNOOSA announced a partnership with the China Manned Space
Agency (CMSA) to give nations the opportunity to fly their experiments and
personnel on board the Chinese space station Tiangong.

In September 2016, UNOOSA announced the first United Nations space mission,
with an initial target launch date in 2021. The mission will utilize the Dream
Chaser spaceplane, designed by the American Sierra Nevada Corporation (SNC),
to enable developing nations to send microgravity payloads into low-Earth
orbit.

In 2019, the launch date for the proposed Dream Chaser mission, expected to
carry up to 35 payloads, was updated to sometime in 2024.

On 26 June 2023, Aarti Holla-Maini, former general secretary of Global
Satellite Operators Association, was appointed as the current UNOOSA director.

## Mandate

UNOOSA works primarily to implement the decisions of UN General Assembly and
of the UN Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space. The office has the
dual objective of supporting the intergovernmental discussions in the
Committee and its Scientific and Technical Subcommittee and Legal
Subcommittee, and of assisting developing countries in using space technology
for development.[_citation needed_]

The mandate has been adjusted a number of times to allow the Office to
undertake, among other tasks, the coordination of the inter-agency cooperation
within the United Nations on the use of space technology - UN-Space
(resolution 3234 implementing the United Nations Programme on Space
Applications (resolution 2601A (XXIV)) and the UN-SPIDER Programme for
disaster risk management and emergency response (resolution 61/110).

The Office also coordinates and cooperates with space agencies and
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations involved in space-related
activities and, on behalf of the United Nations Secretary-General, the
Register of Objects Launched into Outer Space. The office also helps poor
nations suffering from climate change related problems by helping them access
satellite images for free.[_citation needed_]

## Structure

UNOOSA is headed by a Director appointed by the UN Secretary-General, from
2023 this is Aarti Holla-Maini of Belgium and the UK. The Director's Office is
responsible for public outreach, the Register on Objects in Outer Space, and
programmes for youth engagement. It has two sections: the committee, Policy,
and Legal Affairs (CPLA), headed by Takemi Chiku from Japan, and the Space
Applications Section (SAS), headed by Lorant Czaran from Romania. The CPLA
fulfills the Office's secretarial duties to the Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space, its subcommittees, and its working groups. It also convenes
and services the Inter Agency Meeting on Outer Space Activities, known as UN-
Space, which is the central inter-agency coordination mechanisms in the UN
system on overarching space matters. UN-Space meets annually to discuss
current and future activities, emergent technologies of interest, and other
related matters, particularly regarding the global development agenda. The
section is concerned with the establishment of a legal and regulatory
framework governing space activities, and actively fosters capacity-building
in space law and policy.

The Space Applications Section works on building capacities in the practical
application of space technology and space-derived information for development.
The Programme concentrates its efforts on ensuring the equal access of all
countries to new space-based technologies, especially developing nations. To
facilitate the capacity building with focus on developing countries, the
office provides three initiatives:

  * The Human Space Initiative focuses on the public outreach to promote increased awareness among Member States to the benefits of space technology and its applications.
  * The Basic Space Technology Initiative enhances access to space application tools for sustainable development through building capacity in basic space technology.
  * The Basic Space Science Initiative supports the growth of small research groups in universities and research institutions in the developing countries in the fields of astronomy and space science.

The Programme also focuses efforts on the potential of space-based information
for disaster management and emergency response. The UN-SPIDER programme
(established 2006) helps to achieve this objective by being a gateway to space
information for disaster management support, serving as a bridge to connect
the disaster management and space communities and being a facilitator of
capacity-building and institutional strengthening, in particular for
developing countries.

The International Committee on Global Navigation Satellite Systems (ICG)
promotes voluntary cooperation on matters of mutual interest related to civil
satellite-based positioning, navigation, timing, and value-added services. To
support the work of ICG, the Office was designated as the Executive
Secretariat of ICG. In that capacity, UNOOSA is organizing regional workshops,
training courses, and international meetings focusing on capacity-building in
the use of GNSS-related technologies in various rapidly growing fields of
science and industry.

## Staff

Citizens of more than 50 countries have served as staff members, consultants,
and interns.[_citation needed_]

Staff members of the Office have a wide range of educational backgrounds,
including space science (including interdisciplinary fields), physics,
engineering, computer science, political science, international affairs, and
law (including public international law and space law).[_citation needed_]

At different times, a number of other distinguished people, including Adigun
Ade Abiodun, Vladimír Kopal, Mazlan Binti Othman, Luboš Perek, Nandasiri
Jasentuliyana, and Takao Doi served at various positions.[_citation needed_]