International environmental treaty

The **United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change** (**UNFCCC**) is
the UN process for negotiating an agreement to limit dangerous climate change.
It is an international treaty among countries to combat "dangerous human
interference with the climate system". The main way to do this is limiting the
increase in greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. It was signed in 1992 by 154
states at the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development
(UNCED), informally known as the Earth Summit, held in Rio de Janeiro. The
treaty entered into force on 21 March 1994. "UNFCCC" is also the name of the
Secretariat charged with supporting the operation of the convention, with
offices on the UN Campus in Bonn, Germany.

Living Laudato Si' Philippines intervention at COP 27 Catholic Actors meeting
with the Holy See delegation Armen Sarkissian, the 4th president of Armenia
from 2018 to 2022, attends the COP 26

The convention's main objective is explained in Article 2. It is the
"stabilization of greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a level
that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic [i.e., human-caused] interference
with the climate system". The treaty calls for continuing scientific research
into the climate. This research supports meetings and negotiations to lead to
agreements. The aim is to allow ecosystems to adapt to climate change. At the
same time it aims to ensure there are no threats to food production from
climate change or measures to address it. And it aims to enable economic
development to proceed in a sustainable manner. The UNFCCC's work currently
focuses on implementing the Paris Agreement. This agreement entered into force
in 2016. It aims to limit the rise in global temperature to well below 2 °C
(3.6 °F) above levels before the Industrial Revolution, and even aiming to
hold it at 1.5 °C (2.7 °F). The Paris Agreement superseded the UNFCCC's Kyoto
Protocol which had been signed in 1997 and ran from 2005 to 2020.

By 2022, the UNFCCC had 198 parties. Its supreme decision-making body, the
Conference of the Parties (COP), meets every year. Other meetings at the
regional and technical level take place throughout the year. The Paris
Agreement mandates a review or "global stocktake" of progress towards meeting
its goals every five years. The first of these took place at COP28 in the
United Arab Emirates (UAE) in 2023.

The treaty sets out responsibilities for three categories of states. These are
developed countries, developed countries with special financial
responsibilities, and developing countries. The developed countries are called
Annex I countries. At first there were 38 of them. Annex I countries should
adopt national policies and take corresponding measures to limit their
emissions of greenhouse gases. They should also report on steps for returning
individually or jointly to their 1990 greenhouse gas emission levels.

It is problematic that key signatory states are not adhering to their
individual commitments. For this reason, the UNFCCC has been criticized as
being unsuccessful in reducing greenhouse gas emission since its adoption.
Parties to the convention have not agreed on a process allowing for majority
voting. All decisions are taken by consensus, giving individual parties or
countries a veto. The effectiveness of the Paris Agreement to reach its
climate goals is also under debate, especially with regards to its more
ambitious goal of keeping the global temperature rise to under 1.5 °C.

## Development

Part of a series on  
---  
Climate change mitigation  
  
  * Climate change
  * Co-benefits of mitigation
  * Greenhouse gas emissions

  
Energy

  * Carbon capture and storage
  * Coal phase-out
  * Energy transition
  * Fossil fuel divestment
  * Fossil fuel phase-out
  * Fossil fuel vehicles
  * Low-carbon electricity
  * Nuclear power
  * Renewable energy
  * Solar power
  * Sustainable energy
  * Wind power
  * World energy supply and consumption

  
Economics

  * Building insulation
  * Carbon offsets and credits
  * Carbon tax
  * Climate debt
  * Climate finance
  * Climate risk insurance
  * Eco-capitalism
  * Economic analysis of climate change
  * Economics of climate change mitigation
  * Emissions trading
  * Environmental accounting
  * Environmental design
  * Environmental full-cost accounting
  * Environmental impact design
  * Fossil fuel divestment
  * Green building
  * Green home
  * High-performance buildings
  * Impact investing
  * Low-carbon economy
  * Public interest design
  * Sustainability
    * Agriculture
    * Business
    * Capitalism
    * Transport
  * Verified Carbon Standard

  
Frameworks and treaties

  * Business ethics
  * Climate change litigation
  * Ethical banking
  * Paris Agreement
  * Social responsibility
  * Sustainability accounting
  * Sustainability reporting
  * UNFCCC

  
Carbon sinks

  * Blue carbon
  * Carbon dioxide removal
  * Carbon sequestration
  * Direct air capture
  * Climate-smart agriculture
  * Land use, land-use change, and forestry
  * Nature-based solutions
  * Reforestation

  
Related content

  * Climate action
  * Conscious business
  * Corporate social responsibility
  * Corporate sustainability
  * Disinvestment
  * Effects of climate change
  * Energy conservation
  * Ethical consumerism
  * Socially responsible business
  * Sustainability organization
  * Sustainable
    * Consumer behaviour
    * Diet
    * Living
    * Tourism

  
  
  * Portal
  * **Glossary**
  * **Index**

  
  
  * v
  * t
  * e

  
  
The IPCC's First Assessment Report appeared in 1990. The report gave a broad
overview of climate change science and the scientific consensus to date. It
discussed uncertainties and provided evidence of warming. The authors said
they are certain that greenhouse gases are increasing in the atmosphere
because of human activity. This is resulting in more warming of the Earth's
surface. The report led to the establishment of the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).

### Convention Agreement in 1992

The text of the Convention was produced during the meeting of an
Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee in New York from 30 April to 9 May
1992. The Convention was adopted on 9 May 1992 and opened for signature on 4
June 1992 at the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development
(UNCED) in Rio de Janeiro (known by its popular title, the Earth Summit). On
12 June 1992, 154 nations signed the UNFCCC, which upon ratification committed
signatories' governments to reduce atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse
gases with the goal of "preventing dangerous anthropogenic interference with
Earth's climate system". This commitment would require substantial reductions
in greenhouse gas emissions (see the later section, "Stabilization of
greenhouse gas concentrations"). Parties to the Convention have met annually
from 1995 in Conferences of the Parties (COPs) to assess progress in dealing
with climate change.

Article 3(1) of the Convention states that Parties should act to protect the
climate system on the basis of "common but differentiated responsibilities and
respective capabilities", and that developed country Parties should "take the
lead" in addressing climate change. Under Article 4, all Parties make general
commitments to address climate change through, for example, climate change
mitigation and adapting to the eventual impacts of climate change. Article
4(7) states:

> The extent to which developing country Parties will effectively implement
> their commitments under the Convention will depend on the effective
> implementation by developed country Parties of their commitments under the
> Convention related to financial resources and transfer of technology and
> will take fully into account that economic and social development and
> poverty eradication are the first and overriding priorities of the
> developing country Parties.

The Convention specifies the aim of Annex I Parties was stabilizing their
greenhouse gas emissions (carbon dioxide and other anthropogenic greenhouse
gases not regulated under the Montreal Protocol) at 1990 levels, by 2000.

### Overarching objective

The ultimate objective of the Framework Convention is specified in Article 2:
"stabilization of greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a level
that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic [i.e., human-caused] interference
with the climate system". Article 2 of the convention says this "should be
achieved within a time-frame sufficient to allow ecosystems to adapt naturally
to climate change, to ensure that food production is not threatened and to
enable economic development to proceed in a sustainable manner".

### Six priority areas (Action for Climate Empowerment)

Action for Climate Empowerment (ACE) is a term adopted by the UNFCCC in 2015
to have a better name for this topic than "Article 6". It refers to Article 6
of the convention's original text (1992), focusing on six priority areas:
education, training, public awareness, public participation, public access to
information, and international cooperation on these issues. The implementation
of all six areas has been identified as the pivotal factor for everyone to
understand and participate in solving the challenges presented by climate
change. ACE calls on governments to develop and implement educational and
public awareness programmes, train scientific, technical and managerial
personnel, foster access to information, and promote public participation in
addressing climate change and its effects. It also urges countries to
cooperate in this process, by exchanging good practices and lessons learned,
and strengthening national institutions. This wide scope of activities is
guided by specific objectives that, together, are seen as crucial for
effectively implementing climate adaptation and mitigation actions, and for
achieving the ultimate objective of the UNFCCC.

## Key agreements and protocols

### Kyoto Protocol

Map of parties to the Kyoto Protocol

Annex B parties with binding targets in 1st and 2nd period

Annex B parties with binding targets in 1st period but not 2nd

Non-Annex B parties without binding targets

Annex B parties with binding targets in 1st period but which withdrew from the
Protocol

Signatories to the Protocol that have not ratified

Other UN member states and observers that are not party to the Protocol

The Kyoto Protocol (Japanese: 京都議定書, Hepburn: _Kyōto Giteisho_) was an
international treaty which extended the 1992 United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) that commits state parties to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions, based on the scientific consensus that global
warming is occurring and that human-made CO2 emissions are driving it. The
Kyoto Protocol was adopted in Kyoto, Japan, on 11 December 1997 and entered
into force on 16 February 2005. There were 192 parties (Canada withdrew from
the protocol, effective December 2012) to the Protocol in 2020.

The Kyoto Protocol implemented the objective of the UNFCCC to reduce the onset
of global warming by reducing greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere
to "a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the
climate system" (Article 2). The Kyoto Protocol applied to the seven
greenhouse gases listed in Annex A: carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4),
nitrous oxide (N2O), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), perfluorocarbons (PFCs),
sulfur hexafluoride (SF6), nitrogen trifluoride (NF3). Nitrogen trifluoride
was added for the second compliance period during the Doha Round.

The Protocol was based on the principle of common but differentiated
responsibilities: it acknowledged that individual countries have different
capabilities in combating climate change, owing to economic development, and
therefore placed the obligation to reduce current emissions on developed
countries on the basis that they are historically responsible for the current
levels of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.

The Protocol's first commitment period started in 2008 and ended in 2012. All
36 countries that fully participated in the first commitment period complied
with the Protocol. However, nine countries had to resort to the flexibility
mechanisms by funding emission reductions in other countries because their
national emissions were slightly greater than their targets. The 2008
financial crisis reduced emissions. The greatest emission reductions were seen
in the former Eastern Bloc countries because the dissolution of the Soviet
Union reduced their emissions in the early 1990s. Even though the 36 developed
countries reduced their emissions, the global emissions increased by 32% from
1990 to 2010.

### Paris Agreement

Map of signatories and parties to the Paris Agreement

Signatories that have not ratified

State parties

Parties also covered by EU ratification

Agreement does not apply

The Paris Agreement (also called the Paris Accords or Paris Climate Accords)
is an international treaty on climate change that was signed in 2016. The
treaty covers climate change mitigation, adaptation, and finance. The Paris
Agreement was negotiated by 196 parties at the 2015 United Nations Climate
Change Conference near Paris, France. As of February 2023, 195 members of the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) are parties to
the agreement. Of the three UNFCCC member states which have not ratified the
agreement, the only major emitter is Iran. The United States, the second
largest emitter, withdrew from the agreement in 2020, rejoined in 2021, and
announced its withdrawal again in 2025.

The Paris Agreement has a long-term temperature goal which is to keep the rise
in global surface temperature to well below 2 °C (3.6 °F) above pre-industrial
levels. The treaty also states that preferably the limit of the increase
should only be 1.5 °C (2.7 °F). These limits are defined as averages of the
global temperature as measured over many years.

### Further commitments

In addition to the Kyoto Protocol (and its amendment) and the Paris Agreement,
parties to the Convention have agreed to further commitments during UNFCCC
Conferences of the Parties. These include the Bali Action Plan (2007), the
Copenhagen Accord (2009), the Cancún agreements (2010), and the Durban
Platform for Enhanced Action (2012).

Bali Action Plan

As part of the Bali Action Plan, adopted in 2007, all developed country
Parties have agreed to "quantified emission limitation and reduction
objectives, while ensuring the comparability of efforts among them, taking
into account differences in their national circumstances". Developing country
Parties agreed to "[nationally] appropriate mitigation actions context of
sustainable development, supported and enabled by technology, financing and
capacity-building, in a measurable, reportable and verifiable manner." 42
developed countries have submitted mitigation targets to the UNFCCC
secretariat, as have 57 developing countries and the African Group (a group of
countries within the UN).

Copenhagen Accord and Cancún agreements

As part of the 2009 Copenhagen negotiations, a number of countries produced
the Copenhagen Accord. The Accord states that global warming should be limited
to below 2.0 °C (3.6 °F). The Accord does not specify what the baseline is for
these temperature targets (e.g., relative to pre-industrial or 1990
temperatures). According to the UNFCCC, these targets are relative to pre-
industrial temperatures.

114 countries agreed to the Accord. The UNFCCC secretariat notes that "Some
Parties ... stated in their communications to the secretariat specific
understandings on the nature of the Accord and related matters, based on which
they have agreed to [the Accord]." The Accord was not formally adopted by the
Conference of the Parties. Instead, the COP "took note of the Copenhagen
Accord."

As part of the Accord, 17 developed country Parties and the EU-27 submitted
mitigation targets, as did 45 developing country Parties. Some developing
country Parties noted the need for international support in their plans.

As part of the Cancún agreements, developed and developing countries submitted
mitigation plans to the UNFCCC. These plans were compiled with those made as
part of the Bali Action Plan.

UN Race-to-Zero Emissions Breakthroughs

At the 2021 annual meeting UNFCCC launched the 'UN Race-to-Zero Emissions
Breakthroughs'. The aim of the campaign is to transform 20 sectors of the
economy in order to achieve zero greenhouse gas emissions. At least 20% of
each sector should take specific measures, and 10 sectors should be
transformed before COP 26 in Glasgow. According to the organizers, 20% is a
tipping point, after which the whole sector begins to irreversibly change.

Developing countries

At Berlin, Cancún, and Durban, the development needs of developing country
parties were reiterated. For example, the Durban Platform reaffirms that:

> [...] social and economic development and poverty eradication are the first
> and overriding priorities of developing country Parties, and that a low-
> emission development strategy is central to sustainable development, and
> that the share of global emissions originating in developing countries will
> grow to meet their social and development needs.

#### Green Climate Fund

World map for Sustainable Development Goal 13 Indicator 13.A.1: Green Climate
Fund mobilization of $100 billion, 2018

The UN Sustainable Development Goal 13 (SDG 13) includes a target about the
UNFCCC and explains how the Green Climate Fund is meant to be used: One of the
five targets under SDG 13, meant to be achieved by 2030, states: "Implement
the commitment undertaken by developed-country parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change to a goal of mobilizing jointly $100
billion annually by 2020 from all sources to address the needs of developing
countries in the context of meaningful mitigation actions and transparency on
implementation and fully operationalize the Green Climate Fund through its
capitalization as soon as possible." This target only has one indicator:
Indicator 13.a is the "Amounts provided and mobilized in United States dollars
per year in relation to the continued existing collective mobilization goal of
the $100 billion commitment through to 2025".

The Green Climate Fund (GCF) is a fund for climate finance that was
established within the framework of the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCCC). Considered the world's largest fund of its kind,
GCF's objective is to assist developing countries with climate change
adaptation and mitigation activities. The GCF is an operating entity of the
financial mechanism of the UNFCCC. It is based in Songdo, Incheon, South
Korea. It is governed by a Board of 24 members and supported by a Secretariat.

Mafalda Duarte, a Portuguese development economist, is the Fund's Executive
Director.

The Green Climate Fund supports projects and other activities in developing
countries using _thematic funding windows_. It is intended that the Green
Climate Fund be the centrepiece of efforts to raise climate finance under the
UNFCCC. There are four other, smaller multilateral climate funds for paying
out money in climate finance which are coordinated by the UNFCCC. These
include the Adaptation Fund (AF), the Least Developed Countries Fund (LDCF),
the Special Climate Change Fund (SCCF) and the Global Environment Facility
(GEF). The GCF is the largest of these five funds.

As of Dec 2023, the GCF had a portfolio of 13.5 billion USD (51.9 billion USD
including co-financing).

The process of designing the GCF has raised several issues. These include
ongoing questions on how funds will be raised, the role of the private sector,
the level of "country ownership" of resources, and the transparency of the
Board itself. Also, this additional international climate institution might
further fragment taxpayer's money that is put towards climate action.

The Fund's former director Héla Cheikhrouhou has complained in 2016 that the
Fund is backing too many "business-as-usual types of investment proposals".
This view is echoed by a number of civil society organizations.

In 2023, the Executive Director announced a series of reforms aimed at making
the Fund more efficient and positioned to deliver greater impact.

## Secretariat and offices

UN Campus, Bonn, seat of the secretariat

"UNFCCC" is also the name of the Secretariat charged with supporting the
operation of the convention, with offices on the UN Campus in Bonn, Germany.
Offices were formerly located in Haus Carstanjen and in a building on the UN
Campus known as Langer Eugen.

The secretariat is established under Article 8 of the Convention and headed by
the Executive Secretary. The secretariat, augmented through the parallel
efforts of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), aims to gain
consensus through meetings and the discussion of various strategies. Since the
signing of the UNFCCC treaty, Conferences of the Parties (COPs) have discussed
how to achieve the treaty's aims.

From 2010 to 2016 the head of the secretariat was Christiana Figueres,
following by Patricia Espinosa who was appointed Executive Secretary on 18 May
2016 by United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and took office on 18
July 2016. Espinosa retired on 16 July 2022. UN Under Secretary General
Ibrahim Thiaw served as the acting Executive Secretary in the interim. On 15
August 2022, Secretary-General António Guterres appointed former Grenadian
climate minister Simon Stiell as Executive Secretary, replacing Espinosa.

Current and former executive secretaries are:

List of Executive Secretaries of the UNFCCC  
Sources:  
---  
Sr  | Executive Secretary  | Country  | Tenure  | Other offices held   
From  | To   
1  | Michael Zammit Cutajar  |  Malta | 1995  | 2002  |   
2  | Joke Waller-Hunter |  Netherlands | 1 May 2002  | 14 October 2005  |  Director for Sustainable Development (1994–98)   
_Acting_ | Richard Kinley |  Canada | 15 October 2005  | 9 August 2006  | Deputy Executive Secretary, UNFCCC 2006 - 2016  
Chairman, FOGGS (2016–)  
3  | Yvo de Boer |  Netherlands | 10 August 2006  | 1 July 2010  |   
4  | Christiana Figueres |  Costa Rica | 1 July 2010  | 18 July 2016  |   
5  | Patricia Espinosa |  Mexico | 18 July 2016  | 16 July 2022  |  Secretary of Foreign Affairs (2006–12)  
Ambassador to Germany (2013–16)  
_Acting_ | Ibrahim Thiaw |  Mauritania | 17 July 2022  | 14 August 2022  |  Under Secretary General of the United Nations and UNCCD Executive Secretary (2019-)   
6  | Simon Stiell |  Grenada | 15 August 2022  | current  |  Environment minister (2017–22)   
  
## Processes

### Relationship with IPCC reports

The reports published by IPCC play a key role in the annual climate
negotiations held by the UNFCCC. For example, the UNFCCC invited the IPCC to
prepare a report on global warming of 1.5 °C. The IPCC subsequently released
the Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5 °C (SR15) in 2018. The report
showed that it was possible to keep warming below 1.5 °C during the 21st
century. But this would mean deep cuts in emissions. It would also mean rapid,
far-reaching changes in all aspects of society. The report showed warming of 2
°C would have much more severe impacts than 1.5 °C. In other words: every bit
of warming matters. SR15 had an unprecedented impact for an IPCC report in the
media and with the public. It put the 1.5 °C target at the center of climate
activism.

### Conferences of the Parties (CoP)

Logo of United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, 21st Conference
of the Parties (COP 21) and 11th Meeting of the Parties to the 1997 Kyoto
Protocol (CMP 11) from November, 30th till December 2015, 12th.

The United Nations Climate Change Conference are yearly conferences held in
the framework of the UNFCCC. They serve as the formal meeting of the UNFCCC
Parties (_Conferences of the Parties_) (COP) to assess progress in dealing
with climate change, and beginning in the mid-1990s, to negotiate the Kyoto
Protocol to establish legally binding obligations for developed countries to
reduce their greenhouse gas emissions. Since 2005 the Conferences also served
as the Meetings of Parties of the Kyoto Protocol (CMP) and since 2016 the
Conferences also serve as Meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement (CMA).

The first conference (COP1) was held in 1995 in Berlin. The 3rd conference
(COP3) was held in Kyoto and resulted in the Kyoto protocol, which was amended
during the 2012 Doha Conference (COP18, CMP 8). The COP21 (CMP11) conference
was held in Paris in 2015 and resulted in adoption of the Paris Agreement.
COP28 took place in the United Arab Emirates in 2023 and included the first
global stocktake under the Paris Agreement. The UAE nominated Sultan al-Jaber,
who is also head of Abu Dhabi's national oil company ADNOC, to preside over
COP28. Azerbaijan will host COP29 in 2024.

#### Subsidiary bodies

A subsidiary body is a committee that assists the Conference of the Parties.
Subsidiary bodies include:

  * Permanents: 
    * The Subsidiary Body of Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) is established by Article 9 of the convention to provide the Conference of the Parties and, as appropriate, its other subsidiary bodies with timely information and advice on scientific and technological matters relating to the convention. It serves as a link between information and assessments provided by expert sources (such as the IPCC) and the COP, which focuses on setting policy.
    * The Subsidiary Body of Implementation (SBI) is established by Article 10 of the convention to assist the Conference of the Parties in the assessment and review of the effective implementation of the convention. It makes recommendations on policy and implementation issues to the COP and, if requested, to other bodies.
  * Temporary: 
    * Ad hoc Group on Article 13 (AG13), active from 1995 to 1998;
    * Ad hoc Group on the Berlin Mandate (AGBM), active from 1995 to 1997;
    * Ad Hoc Working Group on Further Commitments for Annex I Parties under the Kyoto Protocol (AWG-KP), established in 2005 by the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol to consider further commitments of industrialized countries under the Kyoto Protocol for the period beyond 2012; it concluded its work in 2012 when the CMP adopted the Doha Amendment;
    * Ad Hoc Working Group on Long-term Cooperative Action (AWG-LCA), established in Bali in 2007 to conduct negotiations on a strengthened international deal on climate change;
    * Ad Hoc Working Group on the Durban Platform for Enhanced Action (ADP), established at COP 17 in Durban in 2011 "to develop a protocol, another legal instrument or an agreed outcome with legal force under the Convention applicable to all Parties." The ADP concluded its work in Paris on 5 December 2015.

### National communication

A "National Communication" is a type of report submitted by the countries that
have ratified the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC). Developed countries are required to submit National Communications
every four years and developing countries should do so. Some Least Developed
Countries have not submitted National Communications in the past 5–15 years,
largely due to capacity constraints.

National Communication reports are often several hundred pages long and cover
a country's measures to mitigate greenhouse gas emissions as well as a
description of its vulnerabilities and impacts from climate change. National
Communications are prepared according to guidelines that have been agreed by
the Conference of the Parties to the UNFCCC. The (Intended) Nationally
Determined Contributions (NDCs) that form the basis of the Paris Agreement are
shorter and less detailed but also follow a standardized structure and are
subject to technical review by experts.

### Nationally Determined Contributions

At the 19th session of the Conference of the Parties in Warsaw in 2013, the
UNFCCC created a mechanism for _Intended Nationally Determined Contributions
(INDCs)_ to be submitted in the run up to the 21st session of the Conference
of the Parties in Paris (COP21) in 2015. Countries were given freedom and
flexibility to ensure that these climate change mitigation and adaptation
plans were nationally appropriate. This flexibility, especially regarding the
types of actions to be undertaken, allowed for developing countries to tailor
their plans to their specific adaptation and mitigation needs, as well as
towards other needs.

In the aftermath of COP21, these INDCs became Nationally Determined
Contributions (NDCs) as each country ratified the Paris Agreement, unless a
new NDC was submitted to the UNFCCC at the same time. The 22nd session of the
Conference of the Parties (COP22) in Marrakesh focused on these Nationally
Determined Contributions and their implementation, after the Paris Agreement
entered into force on 4 November 2016.

## Membership and participation

Parties to the UNFCCC

Annex I and II parties

Annex I parties

Non-annex parties

Observer states

As of 2022, the UNFCCC has 198 parties including all United Nations member
states, United Nations General Assembly observers the State of Palestine and
the Holy See, UN non-member states Niue and the Cook Islands, and the
supranational union European Union.

### Classification of Parties and their commitments

Parties to the UNFCCC are classified as:

  * **Annex I** : There are 43 Parties to the UNFCCC listed in Annex I of the convention, including the European Union. These Parties are classified as industrialized (developed) countries and "economies in transition" (EITs). The 14 EITs are the former centrally-planned (Soviet) economies of Russia and Eastern Europe.
  * **Annex II** : Of the Parties listed in Annex I of the convention, 24 are also listed in Annex II of the convention, including the European Union. These Parties are made up of members of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD): these Parties consist of the members of the OECD in 1992, minus Turkey, plus the EU. Annex II Parties are required to provide financial and technical support to the EITs and developing countries to assist them in reducing their greenhouse gas emissions (climate change mitigation) and manage the impacts of climate change (climate change adaptation).
  * **Least-developed countries** (LDCs): 49 Parties are LDCs, and are given special status under the treaty in view of their limited capacity to adapt to the effects of climate change.
  * **Non-Annex I** : Parties to the UNFCCC not listed in Annex I of the convention are mostly low-income developing countries. Developing countries may volunteer to become Annex I countries when they are sufficiently developed.

Parties: Annexes, EU, OECD, EITs

### List of parties

Clickable Euler diagram showing the Parties to the UNFCCC and the most common
party negotition groups, the UNFCCC's Annex I and II membership status, as
well as some other groupings, of economic or political significance

### Annex I countries

There are 43 Annex I Parties including the European Union. These countries are
classified as industrialized countries and economies in transition. Of these,
24 are also Annex II Parties, including the European Union, and 14 are
Economies in Transition.

Annex I countries (24 of these are also _Annex II Parties)_ :

  1. Australia
  2. Austria
  3. Belgium
  4. Canada
  5. Cyprus
  6. Denmark
  7. EU
  8. Finland
  9. France
  10. Germany
  11. Greece
  12. Iceland
  13. Ireland
  14. Italy
  15. Japan
  16. Liechtenstein
  17. Luxembourg
  18. Malta
  19. Monaco
  20. Netherlands
  21. New Zealand
  22. Norway
  23. Portugal
  24. Spain
  25. Sweden
  26. Switzerland
  27. Turkey
  28. United Kingdom
  29. United States of America

Annex I countries that are _Economies in Transition_ :

  1. Belarus
  2. Bulgaria
  3. Croatia
  4. Czech Republic
  5. Estonia
  6. Hungary
  7. Latvia
  8. Lithuania
  9. Poland
  10. Romania
  11. Russian Federation
  12. Slovakia
  13. Slovenia
  14. Ukraine

Notes

  1. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ _**g**_ _**h**_ _**i**_ _**j**_ _**k**_ _**l**_ _**m**_ _**n**_ _**o**_ _**p**_ _**q**_ _**r**_ _**s**_ _**t**_ _**u**_ _**v**_ _**w**_ _**x**_ Annex II Party

### Engagement of civil society

In 2014, The UN with Peru and France created the Global Climate Action Portal
NAZCA for writing and checking all the climate commitments.

Thousands of observers from civil society, business and academia attend the
COPs. They organize a huge programme of activities including officially
coordinated "side events". These complement and inform the official
negotiations.

Civil Society Observers under the UNFCCC have organized themselves in loose
groups, covering about 90% of all admitted organisations. Some groups remain
outside these broad groupings, such as faith groups or national
parliamentarians. The UNFCCC secretariat also recognizes the following groups
as informal NGO groups (2016): Faith-based organizations, Education and
Capacity Building and Outreach NGOs, parliamentarians.

An overview is given in the table below:

Name | Abbreviation | Admitted since   
---|---|---  
Business and industry NGOs | BINGO | 1992   
Environmental NGOs | ENGO | 1992   
Local government and municipal authorities | LGMA | COP1 (1995)   
Indigenous peoples organizations | IPO Archived 1 April 2022 at the Wayback Machine | COP7 (2001)   
Research and independent NGOs | RINGO | COP9 (2003)   
Trade union NGOs | TUNGO | Before COP 14 (2008)   
Women and gender | WGC | Shortly before COP17 (2011)   
Youth NGOs | YOUNGO Archived 19 September 2020 at the Wayback Machine | Shortly before COP17 (2011)   
Farmers | Farmers | (2014)   
  
## Analysis

### Interpreting ultimate objective in Article 2

A "family photo" in 2016, organized by Greenpeace, at the entrance to the
United Nations, with a banner reading "We Will Move Ahead". It highlighted the
resolve, despite all the differences, that we will continue to pursue strong
climate action, moving towards 100 per cent renewals and aiming for 1.5C
target.

The ultimate objective of the Framework Convention contains some key words
that are discussed further below and shown here in italics: "_stabilization of
greenhouse gas concentrations_ in the atmosphere at a level that would prevent
_dangerous_ anthropogenic [i.e., human-caused] interference with the climate
system".

To stabilize atmospheric GHG concentrations, global anthropogenic GHG
emissions would need to peak then decline (see climate change mitigation).
Lower stabilization levels would require emissions to peak and decline earlier
compared to higher stabilization levels. These lower stabilization levels are
associated with lower magnitudes of global warming compared to higher
stabilization levels.

There are a range of views over what level of climate change is _dangerous_.
Scientific analysis can provide information on the risks of climate change,
but deciding which risks are dangerous requires value judgements.

The global warming that has already occurred poses a risk to some human and
natural systems. Higher magnitudes of global warming will generally increase
the risk of negative impacts. Climate change risks are "considerable" with 1
to 2 °C of global warming, relative to pre-industrial levels. 4 °C warming
would lead to significantly increased risks, with potential impacts including
widespread loss of biodiversity and reduced global and regional food security.

Climate change policies may lead to costs that are relevant to the article 2.
For example, more stringent policies to control GHG emissions may reduce the
risk of more severe climate change, but may also be more expensive to
implement.

In decision making, the precautionary principle is considered when possibly
dangerous, irreversible, or catastrophic events are identified, but scientific
evaluation of the potential damage is not sufficiently certain. The
precautionary principle implies an emphasis on the need to prevent such
adverse effects. Following the precautionary principle, uncertainty (about the
exact effects of climate change) is not a reason for inaction, and this is
acknowledged in Article 3.3 of the UNFCCC.

### International trade

Academics and environmentalists criticize article 3(5) of the convention,
which states that any climate measures that would restrict international trade
should be avoided.[_citation needed_]

## Reception

### Criticism of processes

The overall umbrella and processes of the UNFCCC and the adopted Kyoto
Protocol have been criticized by some as not having achieved their stated
goals of reducing the emission of greenhouse gases. The UNFCCC is a
multilateral body concerned with climate change and can be an inefficient
system for enacting international policy: Because the framework system
includes over 190 countries and because negotiations are governed by
consensus, small groups of countries can often block progress.

There has been a failure to achieve effective greenhouse gas emission
reduction policy treaties since 1992. This has driven some countries like the
United States to hold back from ratifying the UNFCCC's most important
agreement—the Kyoto Protocol—in large part because the treaty did not cover
developing countries which now include the largest CO2 emitters. However, this
failed to take into account both the historical responsibility for climate
change since industrialization, which is a contentious issue in the talks, and
also responsibility for emissions from consumption and importation of goods
(see carbon footprint). It has also led Canada to withdraw from the Kyoto
Protocol in 2011 out of a wish not to make its citizens pay penalties that
would result in wealth transfers out of Canada. Both the US and Canada are
looking at internal Voluntary Emissions Reduction schemes to curb carbon
dioxide emissions outside the Kyoto Protocol.

The perceived lack of progress has also led some countries to seek and focus
on alternative high-value activities like the creation of the Climate and
Clean Air Coalition to Reduce Short-Lived Climate Pollutants which seeks to
regulate short-lived pollutants such as methane, black carbon and
hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), which together are believed to account for up to
one third of current global warming but whose regulation is not as fraught
with wide economic impacts and opposition.

In 2010, Japan stated that it will not sign up to a second Kyoto term, because
it would impose restrictions on it not faced by its main economic competitors,
China, India and Indonesia. A similar indication was given by the Prime
Minister of New Zealand in November 2012. At the 2012 conference, last-minute
objections at the conference by Russia, Ukraine, Belarus and Kazakhstan were
ignored by the governing officials, and they have indicated that they will
likely withdraw or not ratify the treaty. These defections place additional
pressures on the UNFCCC process that is seen by some as cumbersome and
expensive: in the UK alone, the climate change department has taken over 3,000
flights in two years at a cost of over £1,300,000 (British pounds sterling).

Further, the UNFCCC (mainly during the Kyoto protocol) failed to facilitate
the transfer of environmentally sound technologies (SETs) which are mechanisms
used to decrease the vulnerability of the human race against the unfavorable
effects of climate change. One of the more widely used of these being
renewable energy sources. The UNFCCC created the body "technology mechanism"
who would distribute these resources to developing countries; however this
distribution was too moderate and, coupled with the failings of the first
commitment period of the Kyoto protocol, led to low ratification numbers for
the second commitment (resulting in it not going ahead). Before the 2015
United Nations Climate Change Conference, _National Geographic_ magazine added
to the criticism, writing: "Since 1992, when the world's nations agreed at Rio
de Janeiro to avoid 'dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate
system,' they've met 20 times without moving the needle on carbon emissions.
In that interval we've added almost as much carbon to the atmosphere as we did
in the previous century."

### Criticism of effectiveness of Paris Agreement

Scenarios of global greenhouse gas emissions. If all countries achieve their
current Paris Agreement pledges, average warming by 2100 would still exceed
the maximum 2°C target set by the agreement.

The effectiveness of the Paris Agreement to reach its climate goals is under
debate, with most experts saying it is insufficient for its more ambitious
goal of keeping global temperature rise under 1.5 °C. Many of the exact
provisions of the Paris Agreement have yet to be straightened out, so that it
may be too early to judge effectiveness. According to the 2020 United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP), with the current climate commitments of the
Paris Agreement, global mean temperatures will likely rise by more than 3 °C
by the end of the 21st century. Newer net zero commitments were not included
in the Nationally Determined Contributions, and may bring down temperatures by
a further 0.5 °C.

With initial pledges by countries inadequate, faster and more expensive future
mitigation would be needed to still reach the targets. Furthermore, there is a
gap between pledges by countries in their NDCs and implementation of these
pledges; one third of the emission gap between the lowest-costs and actual
reductions in emissions would be closed by implementing existing pledges. A
pair of studies in _Nature_ found that as of 2017 none of the major
industrialized nations were implementing the policies they had pledged, and
none met their pledged emission reduction targets, and even if they had, the
sum of all member pledges (as of 2016) would not keep global temperature rise
"well below 2°C".

In 2021, a study using a probabilistic model concluded that the rates of
emissions reductions would have to increase by 80% beyond NDCs to likely meet
the 2 °C upper target of the Paris Agreement, that the probabilities of major
emitters meeting their NDCs without such an increase is very low. It estimated
that with current trends the probability of staying below 2 °C of warming is
5–26% if NDCs were met and continued post-2030 by all signatories.

As of 2020[update], there is little scientific literature on the topics of the
effectiveness of the Paris Agreement on capacity building and adaptation, even
though they feature prominently in the Paris Agreement. The literature
available is mostly mixed in its conclusions about loss and damage, and
adaptation.

According to the stocktake report, the agreement has a significant effect:
while in 2010 the expected temperature rise by 2100 was 3.7–4.8 °C, at COP 27
it was 2.4–2.6 °C and if all countries will fulfill their long-term pledges
even 1.7–2.1 °C. Despite it, the world is still very far from reaching the aim
of the agreement: limiting temperature rise to 1.5 degrees. For doing this,
emissions must peak by 2025. Recent work – on the basis of the first single
calendar year in 2024 with an average temperature above 1.5 degrees Celsius –
indicates that most probably Earth has already entered the 20-year period that
will reach an average warming of 1.5 degrees Celsius. Furthermore, it has been
suggested that the global mean temperature may have already passed the 1.5
degrees Celsius level in 2024.

The Paris Agreement also seemed to have influenced the focus of the following
IPCC reports. Before the Paris Agreement was settled, the IPCC assessment
reports focused roughly in equal proportions on temperatures above and below 2
°C. However, in the 6th assessment report, after the Paris Engagement was
reached, slightly less than 20% of the temperature mentions are above 2 °C and
almost 50% focus on 1.5 °C alone.

## Awards

In 2016, the UNFCCC received the "Prince or Princess of Asturias Award for
International Cooperation" by the Princess of Asturias Awards.

## Meetings of the Parties

A Conference of the Parties (COP) has been held annually for most years since
1995.

List of COPs of the UNFCCC  COP | Year | Country | Begin | End | Days | City | Link   
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
COP1 | 1995 | Germany | 28.03.1995 | 07.04.1995 | 10 | Berlin | [COP 1](https://unfccc.int/process/bodies/conference-of-the-parties/cop-1)   
COP2 | 1996 | Switzerland | 08.07.1996 | 19.07.1996 | 11 | Geneva | [COP 2](https://unfccc.int/process/bodies/conference-of-the-parties/cop-2)   
COP3 | 1997 | Japan | 01.12.1997 | 10.12.1997 | 10 | Kyoto | [COP 3](https://unfccc.int/process/bodies/conference-of-the-parties/cop-3)   
COP4 | 1998 | Argentina | 02.11.1998 | 13.11.1998 | 12 | Buenos Aires | [COP 4](https://unfccc.int/process/bodies/conference-of-the-parties/cop-4)   
COP5 | 1999 | Germany | 25.10.1999 | 05.11.1999 | 12 | Bonn | [COP 5](https://unfccc.int/process/bodies/conference-of-the-parties/cop-5)   
COP6 | 2000 | Netherlands | 13.11.2000 | 24.11.2000 | 12 | The Hague | [COP 6](https://unfccc.int/process/bodies/conference-of-the-parties/cop-6)   
COP7 | 2001 | Morocco | 29.10.2001 | 10.11.2001 | 12 | Marrakech | [COP 7](https://unfccc.int/process/bodies/conference-of-the-parties/cop-7)   
COP8 | 2002 | India | 23.10.2002 | 01.11.2002 | 10 | New Delhi | [COP 8](https://unfccc.int/process/bodies/conference-of-the-parties/cop-8)   
COP9 | 2003 | Italy | 01.12.2003 | 12.12.2003 | 12 | Milan | [COP 9](https://unfccc.int/process/bodies/conference-of-the-parties/cop-9)   
COP10 | 2004 | Argentina | 01.12.2004 | 12.12.2004 | 12 | Buenos Aires | [COP 10](https://unfccc.int/process/bodies/conference-of-the-parties/cop-10)   
COP11 | 2005 | Canada | 28.11.2005 | 10.12.2005 | 12 | Montreal | [COP 11](https://unfccc.int/process/bodies/conference-of-the-parties/cop-11)   
COP12 | 2006 | Kenya | 06.11.2006 | 17.11.2006 | 12 | Nairobi | [COP 12](https://unfccc.int/process/bodies/conference-of-the-parties/cop-12)   
COP13 | 2007 | Indonesia | 03.12.2007 | 15.12.2007 | 12 | Bali | [COP 13](https://unfccc.int/process/bodies/conference-of-the-parties/cop-13)   
COP14 | 2008 | Poland | 01.12.2008 | 12.12.2008 | 12 | Poznań | [COP 14](https://unfccc.int/process/bodies/conference-of-the-parties/cop-14)   
COP15 | 2009 | Denmark | 07.12.2009 | 18.12.2009 | 12 | Copenhagen | [COP 15](https://unfccc.int/process/bodies/conference-of-the-parties/cop-15)   
COP16 | 2010 | Mexico | 29.11.2010 | 11.12.2010 | 12 | Cancún | [COP 16](https://unfccc.int/process/bodies/conference-of-the-parties/cop-16)   
COP17 | 2011 | South Africa | 28.11.2011 | 11.12.2011 | 14 | Durban | [COP 17](https://unfccc.int/process/bodies/conference-of-the-parties/cop-17)   
COP18 | 2012 | Qatar | 26.11.2012 | 08.12.2012 | 12 | Doha | [COP 18](https://unfccc.int/process/bodies/conference-of-the-parties/cop-18)   
COP19 | 2013 | Poland | 11.11.2013 | 22.11.2013 | 12 | Warsaw | [COP 19](https://unfccc.int/process/bodies/conference-of-the-parties/cop-19)   
COP20 | 2014 | Peru | 01.12.2014 | 12.12.2014 | 12 | Lima | [COP 20](https://unfccc.int/process/bodies/conference-of-the-parties/cop-20)   
COP21 | 2015 | France | 30.11.2015 | 12.12.2015 | 12 | Paris | [COP 21](https://unfccc.int/process/bodies/conference-of-the-parties/cop-21)   
COP22 | 2016 | Morocco | 07.11.2016 | 18.11.2016 | 12 | Marrakech | [COP 22](https://unfccc.int/process/bodies/conference-of-the-parties/cop-22)   
COP23 | 2017 | Germany | 06.11.2017 | 17.11.2017 | 12 | Bonn | [COP 23](https://unfccc.int/process/bodies/conference-of-the-parties/cop-23)   
COP24 | 2018 | Poland | 02.12.2018 | 14.12.2018 | 12 | Katowice | [COP 24](https://unfccc.int/process/bodies/conference-of-the-parties/cop-24)   
COP25 | 2019 | Spain | 02.12.2019 | 13.12.2019 | 12 | Madrid | [COP 25](https://unfccc.int/conference/un-climate-change-conference-december-2019)   
COP26 | 2021 | United Kingdom | 31.10.2021 | 12.11.2021 | 12 | Glasgow | [COP 26](https://unfccc.int/conference/glasgow-climate-change-conference-october-november-2021)   
COP27 | 2022 | Egypt | 06.11.2022 | 18.11.2022 | 12 | Sharm el-Sheikh | [COP 27](https://unfccc.int/cop27)   
COP28 | 2023 | United Arab Emirates | 30.11.2023 | 12.12.2023 | 12 | Dubai | [COP 28](https://unfccc.int/cop28)   
COP29 | 2024 | Azerbaijan | 11.11.2024 | 22.11.2024 | 12 | Baku | [COP 29](https://unfccc.int/cop29)   
COP30 | 2025 | Brazil | 31.10.2025 | 12.11.2025 | 12 | Belém | [COP 30](https://unfccc.int/cop30)