UN environmental response agency

The **United Nations Environment Programme** (**UNEP**) is responsible for
coordinating responses to environmental issues within the United Nations
System. It was established by Maurice Strong, its first director, after the
United Nations Conference on the Human Environment in Stockholm in June 1972.
Its mandate is to provide leadership, deliver science and develop solutions on
a wide range of issues, including climate change, the management of marine and
terrestrial ecosystems, and green economic development. The organization also
develops international environmental agreements; publishes and promotes
environmental science and helps national governments achieve environmental
targets.

As a member of the United Nations Development Group, UNEP aims to help the
world meet the 17 Sustainable Development Goals. UNEP hosts the secretariats
of several multilateral environmental agreements and research bodies,
including The Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), The Minamata
Convention on Mercury, The Basel, Rotterdam and Stockholm Conventions, The
Convention on Migratory Species and The Convention on International Trade in
Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES), among others.

In 1988, the World Meteorological Organization and UNEP established the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). UNEP is also one of several
Implementing Agencies for the Global Environment Facility (GEF) and the
Multilateral Fund for the Implementation of the Montreal Protocol. UNEP
sometimes uses the alternative name UN Environment. The headquarters of the
agency is in Nairobi, Kenya.

## History

UNEP Conference on Ozone Layer in The Hague, 1988

In the 1970s, the need for environmental governance at a global level was not
universally accepted, particularly by developing nations. Some argued that
environmental concerns were not a priority for nations in poverty. The
leadership of Canadian diplomat Maurice Strong convinced many of the
developing nations' governments that they needed to prioritize this issue. In
the words of Nigerian professor Adebayo Adedeji: "Mr. Strong, through the
sincerity of his advocacy, soon made it clear that all of us, irrespective of
the stage of our development, have a large stake in the matter."

After developing organizations such as the International Labour Organization,
the Food and Agriculture Organization and the World Health Organization, the
1972 United Nations Conference on the Human Environment (the Stockholm
Conference) was convened. In this conference various topics were discussed
such as pollution, marine life, protection of resources, environmental change,
and disasters relating to natural and biological change. This conference
resulted in a _Declaration on the Human Environment_ (Stockholm Declaration)
and the establishment of an environmental management body, which was later
named the **United Nations Environment Program** (UNEP). UNEP was established
by General Assembly Resolution 2997. Headquarters were established in Nairobi,
Kenya, with a staff of 300, including 100 professionals in a variety of
fields, and with a five-year fund of more than US$100 million. At the time,
US$40 million were pledged by the United States and the remainder by 50 other
nations. The 'Voluntary Indicative Scale of Contribution' established in 2002
has the role to increase the supporters of the UNEP. The finances related to
all programs of UNEP is voluntarily contributed by Member states of the United
Nations. The Environmental Fund, which all nations of UNEP invest in, is the
core source of UNEP's programs. Between 1974 and 1986 UNEP produced more than
200 technical guidelines or manuals on environment including forest and water
management, pest control, pollution monitoring, the relationship between
chemical use and health, and management of industry.

The location of the headquarters proved to be a major controversy, with
developed countries preferring Geneva, where several other UN offices are
based, while developing countries preferred Nairobi, as that would be the
first international organization headquartered in the Global South. At first,
Mexico City, New Delhi, and Cairo were also competing to be the headquarters,
but they pulled out to support Nairobi. Many of the developing countries were
"not particularly supportive of creating a new formal institution for
environmental governance", but supported its creation as an act of "Southern
solidarity".

In 2000, the World Conservation Monitoring Centre, based in Cambridge and
sponsored by IUCN, became part of UNEP.

## Governance

### Executive director

UNEP Executive Director Inger Andersen at the UN Biodiversity conference, 2022

In December 1972, the UN General Assembly unanimously elected Maurice Strong
to be the first head of UN Environment. He was also secretary-general of both
the 1972 United Nations Conference on the Human Environment and the Earth
Summit (1992).

The position was then held for 17 years (1975–1992) by Mostafa Kamal Tolba,
who was instrumental in bringing environmental considerations to the forefront
of global thinking and action. Under his leadership, UN Environment's most
widely acclaimed success—the historic 1987 agreement to protect the ozone
layer—the Montreal Protocol was negotiated. He was succeeded by Elizabeth
Dowdeswell (1992–1998), Klaus Töpfer (1998–2006), Achim Steiner (2006–2016),
and Erik Solheim (2016–2018).

UNEP's acting executive director, Joyce Msuya, took office in November 2018
following the resignation of Erik Solheim. Prior to that appointment, she was
UNEP's deputy executive director. Inger Andersen was appointed executive
director of UNEP by UN secretary-general António Guterres in February 2019.

### List of executive directors

#  | Picture  | Name  
(birth–death) | Nationality  | Took office  | Left office   
---|---|---|---|---|---  
1 |  | **Maurice Strong**  
**(1929–2015)** |  Canada | 1972 | 1975   
2 |  | **Mostafa Kamal Tolba**  
**(1922–2016)** |  Egypt | 1975 | 1992   
3 |  | **Elizabeth Dowdeswell**  
**(born 1944)** |  Canada | 1992 | 1998   
4 |  | **Klaus Töpfer**  
**(1938–2024)** |  Germany | 1998 | 2006   
5 |  | **Achim Steiner**  
**(born 1961)** |  Brazil | 2006 | 2016   
6 |  | **Erik Solheim**  
**(born 1955)** |  Norway | 2016 | 2018   
7 |  | **Joyce Msuya** (acting) **(born 1968)** |  Tanzania | 2018 | 2019   
8 |  | **Inger Andersen**  
**(born 1958)** |  Denmark | 2019 | **Present**  
  
### Environment Assembly

The **United Nations Environment Assembly** (UNEA) is UNEP's governing body.
Created in 2012 to replace the Governing Council, it currently has 193 members
and meets every two years.

The first session of the assembly took place in Nairobi from 23-27 June 2014.

The sixth session (UNEA-6) took place in Nairobi, Kenya, from 26 February to 1
March 2024, and the seventh session (UNEA-7) is scheduled to take place from 8
to 12 December 2025, also in Nairobi. The theme for UNEA-7 is "Advancing
sustainable solutions for a resilient planet".

### Structure

UNEP International Resource Panel meeting, 2011

UNEP's structure includes eight divisions:

  1. Science Division: aims to provide scientifically credible environmental assessments and information for sustainable development. It reports on the state of the global environment, assesses policies, and aims to provide an early warning of emerging environmental threats. It is responsible for the monitoring and reporting of the environment regarding the 2030 Agenda and Sustainable Development Goals.
  2. Policy and Programme Division: makes the policy and programme of the UNEP. This division ensures other divisions are coordinated.
  3. Ecosystems Division: supports countries in conserving, restoring and managing their ecosystems. It addresses the environmental causes and consequences of disasters and conflicts. It helps countries reduce pollution from land-based activities, increase resilience to climate change, and think about the environment in their development planning.
  4. Economy Division: assists large businesses in their efforts to be more environmentally conscious. It has three main branches: Chemicals and Health, Energy and Climate, and Resources and Markets.
  5. Governance Affairs Office: engages member states and other relevant groups to use UNEP's work. The office serves UNEP's governing body, the United Nations Environment Assembly, and its subsidiary organ, the Committee of Permanent Representatives, and manages their meetings. It helps strengthen the visibility, authority and impact of the Assembly as an authoritative voice on the environment.
  6. Law Division: helps to develop environmental law. Works with countries to combat environmental crime and meet international environmental commitments. The law division aims to improve cooperation between lawmakers around the world who are making environmental laws.
  7. Communication Division: develops and disseminates UNEP's messages. It delivers them to governments and individuals through digital and traditional media channels.
  8. Corporate Services Division: handles UNEP's corporate interests such as management and exposure to financial risk.

## Topic areas

Presentation on climate finance by Søren E. Lütken, UNEP Senior Adviser, 2012

UNEP's main activities are related to:

  1. Climate action
  2. Disasters and conflicts ("to minimize the environmental causes and consequences of crises")
  3. Nature Action ("conservation, restoration and the sustainable use of nature")
  4. Global environmental governance (the UNEP website states that "UNEP is committed to supporting countries in developing and implementing integrated environmental policies").
  5. Data collection and reporting (UNEP provides information and data on the global environment to stakeholders including governments, non-governmental organizations and the public for them to engage in realizing the Sustainable Development Goals. For example, the UN environment Live Platform and Online Access to Research in Environment (OARE) provide transparent information collected by UNEP.)
  6. Chemicals and waste
  7. Resource efficiency

## Advocacy

UNEP uses its position to raise awareness for a range of issues.

### Climate change

Already in 1989, UNEP published a statement predicting that "entire nations
could be wiped off the face of the Earth by sea level rise if the global
warming trend is not reversed by the year 2000". In 2005, UNEP issued a joint
statement with the United Nations University predicting that "50 million
people could become environmental refugees by 2010, fleeing the effects of
climate change". This was reinforced in 2008, by Srgjan Kerim, President of
the UN General Assembly, who estimated that there would be between 50 million
and 200 million environmental migrants by 2010.

At the fifth Magdeburg Environmental Forum held in 2008, in Magdeburg,
Germany, UNEP and car manufacturer Daimler AG called for the establishment of
infrastructure for electric vehicles. At this international conference 250
politicians and representatives of non-government organizations discussed
future road transportation under the motto of "Sustainable Mobility–the
Post-2012 CO2 Agenda".

### Various initiatives

#### International Environmental Education Programme (1975–1995)

For two decades, UNESCO and UNEP led the International Environmental Education
Programme (1975–1995), which set out a vision for, and gave practical guidance
on how to mobilize education for environmental awareness. In 1976 UNESCO
launched an environmental education newsletter _Connect_ as the official organ
of the UNESCO-UNEP International Environmental Education Programme (IEEP).
Until 2007 it served as a clearinghouse to exchange information on
environmental education in general and to promote the aims and activities of
the IEEP in particular, as well as being a network for institutions and
individuals interested and active in environment education.

#### Circular economy

UNEP is the co-chair and a founding partner (along with groups such as the
Ellen MacArthur Foundation) for the Platform for Accelerating the Circular
Economy, which is a public-private partnership of over 50 global organizations
and governments seeking to support the transition to a global circular
economy.

#### The Regional Seas Programme

Established in 1974, this is the world's only legal programme for the purpose
of protecting the oceans and seas at the regional level. More than 143
countries participate in 18 regional programmes established by the Regional
Seas Conventions and Action Plans, with 14 of them underpinned by legally
binding international conventions, such as the Helsinki Convention, the Oslo
Dumping Convention, the Barcelona Convention or the Bucharest Convention. The
RSCAPs include the Caribbean region, East Asian seas, East African region,
Mediterranean Basin, Pacific Northwest region, West African region, Caspian
Sea, Black Sea region, Northeast Pacific region, Red Sea and Gulf of Aden,
ROPME Sea Area, South Asian seas, Southeast Pacific region, Pacific region,
Arctic region, Antarctic region, Baltic Sea, and Northeast Atlantic region.
Each programme consists of countries which share the same sea and manages this
sea at the regional level. The programmes are controlled by secretariats or
Regional Coordinating Units and Regional Activity Centers. UNEP protects seas
by promoting international conventions through education and training.

The Mediterranean Action Plan of the United Nations Environment Programme
(UNEP/MAP) was established in 1975 as the first regional action plan under the
Regional Seas Programme.

#### Faith for Earth Initiative

Launched in 2017, the initiative's goal is to encourage and collaborate with
faith-based organizations to protect the environment and invest in green
resources. In 2020, UNEP published a book with the Parliament of the World's
Religions Climate Action Program entitled, "Faith for Earth: A Call for
Action." The book serves as an educational resource for students, teachers,
and leaders across the world and highlights the role that faith-based
organizations can play in addressing critical environmental issues.

## Other activities

### Awards programs

Several awards programs have been established to recognize outstanding work in
the environmental field. The Global 500 Roll of Honour was initiated in 1987
and ended in 2003. Its 2005 successor, Champions of the Earth, and a similar
award, Young Champions of the Earth, are given annually to entrepreneurs,
scientists, policy leaders, upcoming talent, individuals and organizations who
make significant positive impacts on resources and the environment in their
areas.

### International years

The Minister of State for Environment and Forests, Shri Jairam Ramesh,
delivering the inaugural address at the _Reporting Green: UNEP Media Workshop
on Journalism and the Environment_ during the International Year of Forests,
2011

UN assigns specific years to topics to raise awareness and engagement. The
following years pertain to environmental topics:

  * 2007 – International Year of the Dolphin: International Patron of the Year of the Dolphin was H.S.H. Prince Albert II of Monaco, with Special Ambassador to the cause being Nick Carter of the Backstreet Boys musical group.
  * 2010 – International Year of Biodiversity
  * 2011 – International Year of Forests
  * 2012 – International Year for Sustainable Energy for All
  * 2013 – International Year of Water Cooperation
  * 2014 – International Year of Family Farming
  * 2015 – International Year of Light and Light-based Technologies
  * 2016 – International Year of Pulses
  * 2017 – International Year of Sustainable Tourism for Development
  * 2020 – International Year of Plant Health
  * 2021 – International Year of Fruits and Vegetables

See international observance and list of environmental dates.

## Notable achievements

UNEP has registered several successes, such as the 1987 Montreal Protocol for
limiting emissions of gases blamed for thinning the planet's protective ozone
layer, and the 2017 Minamata Convention, a treaty to limit toxic mercury.

UNEP has sponsored the development of solar loan programmes, with attractive
return rates, to buffer the initial deployment costs and entice consumers to
consider and purchase solar PV systems. The most famous example is the solar
loan programme sponsored by UNEP that helped 100,000 people finance solar
power systems in India. Success in India's solar programme has led to similar
projects in other parts of the developing world, including Tunisia, Morocco,
Indonesia and Mexico.

In 2001, UNEP alerted about the destruction of the Marshlands when it released
satellite images showing that 90 percent of the marsh had been lost. The UNEP
"support for environmental management of the Iraqi Marshland" began in 2004,
to manage the marshland area in an environmentally sound manner.

UNEP has a programme for young people known as Tunza. Within this programme
are other projects like the AEO for Youth.

## Reform

Following the 2007 publication of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change Fourth Assessment Report, the _Paris Call for Action_ , presented by
French president Jacques Chirac and supported by 46 countries, called for the
UNEP to be replaced by a new and more powerful "United Nations Environment
Organization", to be modeled on the World Health Organization. The 46
countries included the European Union nations, but notably did not include the
United States, Saudi Arabia, Russia, and China, the top four emitters of
greenhouse gases.

In December 2012, following the Rio+20 Summit, a decision by the General
Assembly of the United Nations to "strengthen and upgrade" the UNEP and
establish universal membership of its governing body was confirmed. In other
words, it was reorganized by applying the existing executive member system (58
member states) from 1973 to 2013 to a universal member system (all UN member
states). It was implemented in 2014.

## Funding

The European Investment Bank and the United Nations Environment Programme
created the Renewable Energy Performance Platform (REPP) in 2015 to assist a
United Nations project dubbed Sustainable Energy for All. Renewable Energy
Performance Platform was established with $67 million from the United
Kingdom's International Climate Finance initiative, administered by the
Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy, in 2015, and $128
million in 2018. REPP was established with a five-year goal of improving
energy access for at least two million people in Sub-Saharan Africa. It has so
far invested around $45 million to renewable energy projects in 13 countries
in Sub-Saharan Africa. Solar power and hydropower are among the energy methods
used in the projects.

### Funding complications

In September 2018, a series of allegations were made against the executive
director of the UNEP, Eric Solheim, at that time, including excessive number
of days spent outside the headquarters in Nairobi, Kenya. As a result, Eric
Solheim resigned. Several donor countries withdrew their donation in the
aftermath of the allegation, including the Dutch government who announced it
would withhold $8 million in funding to UNEP until nepotism issues were
resolved. Sweden and Denmark stopped funding as well. A spokesman for the
Norwegian Institute of International Affairs said the freezing of funds was
probably unprecedented.