Global development network of the United Nations

| This article **needs additional citations forverification**. Please help
improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced
material may be challenged and removed.  
_Find sources:_ "United Nations Development Programme" – news **·** newspapers
**·** books **·** scholar **·** JSTOR _( October 2024)__(Learn how and when to
remove this message)_  
---|---  
  
The **United Nations Development Programme** (**UNDP**) is a United Nations
agency tasked with helping countries eliminate poverty and achieve sustainable
economic growth and human development. The UNDP emphasizes on developing local
capacity towards long-term self-sufficiency and prosperity.

Based at the headquarters of the United Nations in New York City, it is the
largest UN development aid agency, with offices in 177 countries. The UNDP is
funded entirely by voluntary contributions from UN member states.

## Founding

The UNDP was founded on 22 November 1965 through the merger of the Expanded
Programme of Technical Assistance (EPTA) and the Special Fund in 1958. The
rationale was to "avoid duplication of [their] activities". The EPTA was set
up in 1949 to support the economic and political aspects of underdeveloped
countries while the Special Fund was to enlarge the scope of UN technical
assistance. The Special Fund arose from the idea of a Special United Nations
Fund for Economic Development (SUNFED) (which was initially known as the
United Nations Fund for Economic Development (UNFED).

Countries such as the Nordic countries were proponents of such a United
Nations (UN) controlled fund. However, the fund was opposed by other developed
countries, especially by the United States, which were wary of the Third World
dominating such funding and preferred it to be under the auspices of the World
Bank. The concept of SUNFED was dropped to form the Special Fund. This Special
Fund was a compromise over the SUNFED concept: it did not provide investment
capital but only helped to bring pre-conditions for private investment.

With the US proposing and creating the International Development Association
within the World Bank's umbrella, the EPTA and the Special Fund appeared to be
conducting similar work. In 1962, the United Nations Economic and Social
Council asked the Secretary-General to consider the merits and disadvantages
of merging UN technical assistance programmes and in 1966, the EPTA and the
Special Fund merged to form the UNDP.

## Budget

| This section needs to be **updated**. Please help update this article to
reflect recent events or newly available information. _( December 2019)_  
---|---  
  
In 2022, UNDP's budget was US$6,737.92 million.

### Funding information table

The following table lists the top 15 DAC 5 Digit Sectors to which UNDP has
committed funding, as recorded in its International Aid Transparency
Initiative (IATI) publications. The UNDP claims on the IATI Registry website
that the data covers 100% of development flows.

UNDP topped the Aid Transparency Index published by Publish What You Fund in
2015 and 2016, with an excellent score of 93.3%.

| Committed funding (US$ millions)  
---|---  
Sector | 2012 | 2013 | 2014 | 2015 | 2016 | Sum   
Security system management and reform  | 624.3  | 541.7  | 591.6  | 643.8  | 656.4  | 3,057.9   
STD control including HIV/AIDS  | 415.9  | 421.4  | 412.1  | 465.2  | 483.5  | 2,198.1   
Public sector policy and administrative management  | 216.3  | 299.3  | 372.2  | 456.9  | 462.9  | 1,807.7   
Decentralisation and support to subnational government  | 256.7  | 327.5  | 302.7  | 338.4  | 505.8  | 1,731.1   
Reconstruction relief and rehabilitation  | 249.0  | 282.5  | 338.1  | 376.5  | 422.0  | 1,668.2   
Elections  | 157.8  | 267.8  | 330.3  | 279.0  | 149.8  | 1,184.7   
Disaster prevention and preparedness  | 146.4  | 170.2  | 211.2  | 243.7  | 241.3  | 1,012.9   
Energy policy and administrative management  | 113.3  | 157.0  | 198.9  | 212.3  | 316.2  | 997.6   
General budget support  | 77.6  | 142.7  | 263.1  | 223.7  | 273.9  | 981.1   
Social/ welfare services  | 108.7  | 149.4  | 155.4  | 219.4  | 195.2  | 828.1   
Legal and judicial development  | 62.1  | 76.6  | 97.5  | 113.8  | 106.9  | 456.8   
Environmental policy and administrative management  | 49.6  | 63.4  | 70.9  | 95.4  | 122.0  | 401.3   
Power generation/renewable sources  | 42.8  | 44.4  | 60.3  | 101.0  | 125.2  | 373.7   
Democratic participation and civil society  | 56.3  | 62.1  | 62.1  | 65.9  | 76.6  | 323.0   
Human rights  | 28.1  | 45.5  | 52.4  | 88.5  | 56.2  | 270.8   
Other  | 334.5  | 315.5  | 379.8  | 507.3  | 969.5  | 2,506.6   
Total  | 2,939.5  | 3,367.1  | 3,898.5  | 4,430.9  | 5,163.6  | 19,799.6   
  
UNDP links and coordinates global and national efforts to achieve the goals
and national development priorities laid out by host countries. UNDP focuses
primarily on five developmental challenges:

#### Democratic governance

UNDP supports national democratic transitions by providing policy advice and
technical support, improving institutional and individual capacity within
countries, educating populations about and advocating for democratic reforms,
promoting negotiation and dialogue, and sharing successful experiences from
other countries and locations.

#### Poverty reduction

| This section **relies excessively onreferences to primary sources**. Please
improve this section by adding secondary or tertiary sources.  
_Find sources:_ "United Nations Development Programme" – news **·** newspapers
**·** books **·** scholar **·** JSTOR _( December 2013)__(Learn how and when
to remove this message)_  
---|---  
  
UNDP helps countries develop strategies to combat poverty by expanding access
to economic opportunities and resources, linking poverty programmes with
countries' larger goals and policies, and ensuring a greater voice for the
poor. It also works at the macro level to reform trade, encourage debt relief
and foreign investment, and ensure the poorest of the poor benefit from
globalisation.

The UNDP International Policy Centre for Inclusive Growth (IPC-IG) in
Brasília, Brazil, expands the capacities of developing countries to design,
implement and evaluate socially inclusive development projects. IPC-IG is a
global forum for South-South policy dialogue and learning, having worked with
more than 7,000 officials from more than 50 countries.

A 2013 evaluation of the UNDP's poverty reduction efforts states that the UNDP
has effectively supported national efforts to reduce poverty, by helping
governments make policy changes that benefit the poor. Nevertheless, the same
evaluation also states there is a strong need for better measurement and
monitoring of the impacts of the UNDP's work. The UNDP's Strategic Plan from
2014 to 2017 incorporates the recommendations of this poverty evaluation.

#### Crisis prevention and recovery

UNDP works to reduce the risk of armed conflicts or disasters, and promote
early recovery after crisis have occurred. UNDP works through its country
offices to support local government in needs assessment, capacity development,
coordinated planning, and policy and standard setting.

Examples of UNDP risk reduction programmes include efforts to control small
arms proliferation, strategies to reduce the impact of natural disasters, and
programmes to encourage use of diplomacy and prevent violence. Recovery
programmes include disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of ex-
combatants, demining efforts, programmes to reintegrate displaced persons,
restoration of basic services, and transitional justice systems for countries
recovering from warfare.

Following the suspension of most foreign aid to Afghanistan due to its
takeover by the Taliban, the UNDP took responsibility for funding most
essential health services in the country, including the salaries of over
25,000 health care professionals. This was observed as being outside the
organization's usual development activities, and was facilitated by special
licencing by the United States government.

#### Environment and energy

As the poor are disproportionately affected by environmental degradation and
lack of access to clean, affordable water, sanitation, and energy services,
UNDP seeks to address environmental issues in order to improve developing
countries' abilities to develop sustainably, increase human development and
reduce poverty.

UNDP's environmental strategy focuses on effective water governance including
access to water supply and sanitation, access to sustainable energy services,
Sustainable land management to combat desertification and land degradation,
conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity, and policies to control
emissions of harmful pollutants and ozone-depleting substances. UNDP's Equator
Initiative office biennially offers the Equator Prize to recognize outstanding
indigenous community efforts to reduce poverty through the conservation and
sustainable use of biodiversity, and thus making local contributions to
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).

Between 1996 and 1998, the UNDP sponsored the deployment of 45 Multifunction
Platforms (MFP) in rural Mali. These installations, driven by a diesel engine,
power devices such as pumps, grain mills and appliances. By 2004, the number
of MFPs in Mali reached 500.

In 2012 the Biodiversity Finance Initiative (BIOFIN) was established. BIOFIN
brings 30 countries together to develop and implement evidence-based finance
plans to safeguard biodiversity. BIOFIN has developed an innovative and
adaptable methodology to guide countries to analyze the policy and
institutional context for biodiversity finance; measure the current
biodiversity expenditures; assess future financial needs, and identify the
most suitable finance solutions to achieve national biodiversity targets.

#### HIV/AIDS

UNDP works to help countries prevent further spreading of and reduce the
impact of HIV/AIDS, convening The Global Commission on HIV and the Law which
was reported in 2012.

#### Hub for Innovative Partnerships

Major programmes underway are:

World Map of Gender Inequality Index by country sourced from 2017 Human
Development Report

  * ART Global Initiative
  * World Alliance of Cities Against Poverty
  * Territorial Approach to Climate Change
  * Africa–Kazakhstan Partnership for the SDGs

#### Human Development Report

Since 1991, the UNDP has annually published the Human Development Report,
which includes topics on Human Development and the annual Human Development
Index.

The Gender Inequality Index is one such topic discussed in the Human
Development Report.

### Evaluation

The UNDP spends about 0.2% of its budget on internal evaluation of the
effectiveness of its programmes. The UNDP's Evaluation Office is a member of
the UN Evaluation Group (UNEG) which brings together all the units responsible
for evaluation in the UN system. Currently the UNEG has 43 members and 3
observers.

## Global Policy Centres

The UNDP runs six Global Policy Centres, including the Seoul Policy Centre
(USPC) on partnerships, the Nairobi Global Policy Centre on Resilient
Ecosystems and Desertification (GPC-Nairobi), the Singapore-based Global
Centre for Technology, Innovation and Sustainable Development (GC-TISD), the
Istanbul International Centre for Private Sector in Development (IICPSD), the
Oslo Governance Centre, and the Singapore-based Global Centre for Public
Service Excellence (GCPSE) that issues the "Raffles Review" email newsletter
on developments in public administration research.

## UN coordination role

UNDP plays a coordination role in the UN's activities in the field of
development. This is mainly executed through its vice-chair role of the UN
Development Group and integrator function, within the broader the Resident
Coordinator System.

### United Nations Development Group

The United Nations Development Group (UNDG) was created by the Secretary-
General in 1997, to improve the effectiveness of UN development at the country
level. The UNDG brings together the operational agencies working on
development. The Group is chaired by the Deputy Secretary-General of the
United Nations, with the Administrator of UNDP serving as vice-chair. UN
Development Coordination Office (DCO) provides the Secretariat to the Group.

The UNDG develops policies and procedures that allow member agencies to work
together and analyse country issues, plan support strategies, implement
support programmes, monitor results and advocate for change.

### Resident coordinator system

The Resident Coordinator (RC) system coordinates all organizations of the
United Nations system dealing with operational activities for development in
the field. The RC system aims to bring together the different UN agencies to
improve the efficiency and effectiveness of operational activities at the
country level. Resident Coordinators lead UN country teams in more than 130
countries and are the designated representatives of the Secretary-General for
development operations. Working closely with national governments, Resident
Coordinators and country teams to advocate the interests and mandates of the
UN drawing on the support and guidance of the entire UN family. It is now
coordinated by the UNSDG, chaired by the Deputy Secretary-General of the
United Nations.

## Innovation Facility

The UNDP established the Innovation Facility in 2014, with support from the
Government of Denmark, as a dedicated funding mechanism to nurture promising
development interventions.

The Innovation Facility offers technical assistance and seed funding to
collaborators across 170 countries and territories to explore new approaches
to complex development challenges. Since its inception, the Innovation
Facility has fostered innovation labs across all five regions to better
deliver and monitor the SDGs. In 2015, the Innovation Facility invested in 62
initiatives across 45 countries to achieve 16 SDGs.

## Controversies

### NSA surveillance

Documents of Edward Snowden showed in December 2013 that British and American
intelligence agencies surveillance targets with the United States National
Security Agency (NSA) included organisations such as the United Nations
Development Programme, the UN's children's charity UNICEF and Médecins Sans
Frontières and the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS).

### Allegations of UNDP resources used by Hamas

In August 2016, Israel's Shin Bet security agency publicized the arrest of
Wahid Abdallah al Bursh, a Palestinian engineer employed by the UNDP, stating
he had confessed to being recruited in 2014 to help Hamas, the dominant
Islamist group in Gaza. Among "various assignments" Bursh performed on behalf
of Hamas was "using UNDP resources" to build a maritime jetty for its
fighters; no further details were provided on this claim. Shin Bet also
claimed Bursh had persuaded his UNDP superiors to prioritize neighbourhoods
with Hamas operatives when earmarking reconstruction funds for Gaza, which was
devastated by the 2014 war with Israel.

### Alleged financial irregularities

The UNDP had been criticised by members of its staff and the Bush
administration of the United States for irregularities in its finances in
North Korea. Artjon Shkurtaj claimed that he had found counterfeit US dollars
in the programmes' safe despite staff being paid in euros. The UNDP denied
keeping improper accounts and any other wrongdoing.

### Disarmament and controversy

In mid-2006, as first reported by Inner City Press and then by _New Vision_,
UNDP halted its disarmament programmes in the Karamoja region of Uganda in
response to human rights abuses in the parallel forcible disarmament
programmes carried out by the Uganda People's Defence Force.

### Russia UNDP GEF Project Corruption Scandal

In 2019, reports alleging possible misappropriation of funds for UNDP projects
in Russia began to appear in the mainstream media. An article called "Greed
and Graft at U.N. Climate Program" in August 2019 in _Foreign Policy_ reported
the findings of a 2017 final evaluation that a UNDP Global Environment
Facility greenhouse gas reduction project, the UNDP GEF Energy Efficiency
Standards and Labels project in Russia with a budget of US$7.8 million, did
not meet its goals and had "strong indicators of deliberate misappropriation"
of funds. The _Foreign Policy_ article reported that concerns raised by
whistleblowers Dmitry Ershov and John O'Brien and multiple other consultants
to the project over many years about irregularities in the programme — which
were first reported internally as far back in 2011— were largely dismissed or
ignored for several years by their superiors in Istanbul, New York, and
Washington, as well as by donor governments, including the United States. The
_Foreign Policy_ article reported that a 2017 confidential audit appendix
prepared by final evaluators found "strong indicators of deliberate
misappropriation" of millions of dollars in funds from the project between
2010 and 2014.

This led in March 2020 to 12 donor governments writing a letter to UNDP
Administrator Achim Steiner demanding from UNDP an independent review of
UNDP's handling of the energy efficiency standards and labels project in
Russia, as reported again in _Foreign Policy_ magazine in December 2020 where
it was revealed that these donors had blasted UNDP for resisting appeals to
fight corruption and further reports by the Financial Times about the
'systemic nature' of the problems and also reports by various other media
outlets such as Climate Change News, Passblue and in Newsroom in the New
Zealand media. In January 2021, this independent report into the matter as
requested by the donors was published, 'Systems and Silos'. This independent
review found "irregularities" and concluded the project in question was not
managed "either efficiently or effectively" by UNDP and that a number of
individuals were able to 'game the relatively weak systems of governance and
technical capacity.' It suggested UNDP consider returning to the Global
Environment Facility (which funded the project) its "entire management fee" as
"restitution" and proposed "ongoing efforts to achieve changes in the work
culture that reward greater transparency and remove fears of unfair reprisals"
aimed at whistleblowers. Concerns over UNDP's failure to handle the Russia
controversy in a satisfactory manner led to the government of the Netherlands
withholding some 10 million euros in funding in early 2021.

In February 2022, the leaders of three leading NGOs in the fight against
corruption, Transparency International, the Whistleblower International
Network or WIN, and the Government Accountability Project wrote a public
letter to UNDP's administrator Achim Steiner, expressing their serious
concerns about the lack of whistleblower protection for John O'Brien and
Dmitry Ershov by UNDP and highlighting the conclusion of the independent
review on the failure by UNDP to carry out John O'Brien's whistleblower case
in a satisfactory manner. According to the 2019 Foreign Policy article, Ershov
claimed he was "pushed out of his U.N. job" after raising concerns about
procurement irregularities and project conflicts of interest way back at the
end of 2014.

In June 2022, BBC Two broadcast a 90-minute documentary,_The Whistleblowers:
Inside the UN_ , which reported on whistleblower cases across the UN system,
including John O'Brien's case. It reported that O'Brien was fired from UNDP in
March 2022 several days after his BBC interview. The documentary was described
by _The Guardian_ as exposing "a toxic culture" where senior UN leaders hide
"behind a cloak of saintliness."

### Iraq UNDP Funding Facility for Stabilisation Corruption Scandal

In on 22 January 2024, the Guardian Newspaper reported that the US$1.88
billion funding facility for stabilization was riddled with corruption. The
Guardian discovered that there had been some 136 corruption allegation cases
to its Office of Audit and Investigations (OAI) in relation to the
reconstruction programme – the majority of which were against suppliers rather
than employees. Then on 5 February 2024, the Guardian Newspaper reported that
UNDP had commissioned an internal management review of the Iraq corruption
problems. It also reported that several donors had requested an independent
review which exactly is what happened in the case of the UNDP GEF Russia
corruption scandal.

The Guardian articles clearly show that the corruption problems at UNDP and
the failure to protect whistleblowers remain, and have not been fixed. The
Guardian Newspaper article reveals very similar themes of widespread kickbacks
and corruption, staff who are scared to report wrongdoing, and almost no
protection for whistleblowers who are scared to come forward in case they are
retaliated against and/or lose their jobs.

## Administrator

The UNDP Administrator has the rank of an Under-Secretary-General of the
United Nations. While the Administrator is often referred to as the third
highest-ranking official in the UN (after the Secretary-General and Deputy
Secretary-General), this has never been formally codified.

In addition to his/her responsibilities as head of UNDP, the Administrator is
also the vice-chair of the UN Sustainable Development Group.

The position of Administrator is appointed by the Secretary-General of the UN
and confirmed by the General Assembly for a term of four years.

Achim Steiner was the most recent Administrator, serving from 2017 until June
2025, when his second term ended. He was replaced on a temporary basis by
Haoliang Xu, who is serving as acting Administrator until a new, permanent
Administrator is appointed. The five countries on the UNDP board have some
influence over selection of the Administrator.[_citation needed_]

The first administrator of the UNDP was Paul G. Hoffman, former head of the
Economic Cooperation Administration which administered the Marshall Plan.

Other holders of the position have included: Bradford Morse, a former
Republican congressman from the U.S. state of Massachusetts; William Draper,
an American venture capitalist and friend of George H. W. Bush who saw one of
the UN system's major achievements, the Human Development Report, introduced
during his tenure; Mark Malloch Brown of the UK, who was previously Vice
President of External Affairs at the World Bank and subsequently became UN
Deputy Secretary-General; and Kemal Derviş, a former finance minister of
Turkey and senior World Bank official.

Nr  | Administrator  | Nationality  | Term   
---|---|---|---  
9  | Achim Steiner |  Brazil /  Germany | 2017–2025   
8 | Helen Clark |  New Zealand | 2009–2017   
7 | Kemal Derviş |  Turkey | 2005–2009   
6 | Mark Malloch Brown |  United Kingdom | 1999–2005   
5 | James Gustave Speth |  United States | 1993–1999   
4 | William Henry Draper | 1986–1993   
3 | F. Bradford Morse | 1976–1986   
2 | Rudolph A. Peterson | 1972–1976   
1 | Paul G. Hoffman | 1966–1972   
  
### Associate Administrator

During meetings of the United Nations Sustainable Development Group, which are
chaired by the Administrator, UNDP is represented by the Associate
Administrator.[_citation needed_] The position has been held by Holiang Xu
(China) since June 2023. He replaced Usha Rao-Monari (India)

### Assistant administrators

Assistant Administrators of the UNDP, Assistant Secretaries-General and
Directors of the Regional Bureaus are:

  * Abdallah Al Dardari (Syria), Head of Regional Bureau for Arab States
  * Ahunna Eziakonwa (Nigeria) Head of Regional Bureau for Africa
  * Kanni Wignaraja (Sri Lanka) Head of Regional Bureau for Asia and Pacific
  * Ivana Živković (Croatia) Head of Regional Bureau for Europe and the CIS
  * Michelle Muschett (Panama), Head of Regional Bureau for Latin America and the Caribbean
  * Angelique M. Crumbly, Head of Bureau for Management Services
  * Susan Brown (Switzerland), Head of Bureau for External Relations and Advocacy
  * Shoko Noda (Japan), Director of Crisis Bureau