International Multilateral Development Bank

The **West African Development Bank** \- **WADB** (fr. **Banque Ouest
Africaine de Développement** \- **BOAD** / pt. **Banco de Desenvolvimento do
Oeste Africano** \- **BDOA**) was established in 1973 to serve the nations of
Francophone and Lusophone West Africa. The BOAD is organised by the Central
Bank of West African States and its eight member governments: Benin, Burkina
Faso, Guinea Bissau, Côte d'Ivoire, Mali, Niger, Senegal and Togo. It is
funded by member states, foreign governments and international agencies. Its
headquarters are in Lomé, Togo.

## Creation

The BOAD was created on 14 November 1973 by member states of the West African
Monetary Union (WAMU). The original charter focused on development of member
economies towards balanced development and to prepare economies for future
West African economic integration. In 1994, it became the development arm of
the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU/UEMOA).

## Structure

Since that time several international organisations have become members of the
bank, adding funding and sitting on the board. These include the African
Development Bank, the European Investment Bank, the Export and Import Bank of
India (Exim Bank), and the People's Bank of China. The president of the bank's
board is chosen by the heads of state of UEMOA, and since January 2008,
Abdoulaye Bio-Tchane. The bank's day-to-day operations are carried out by the
President and the Bank adminmanager, cabinet, directorships of departments
based in Lome, and mission offices based in the member nations.

## Mission

The BOAD released a revised mission statement in 2001, refocusing their
funding on three development goals: poverty reduction, economic integration
and promotion of private sector activity. The bank disburses long- and medium-
term loans, previously available only to BOAD member governments and public
institutions, are since 2002 also offered to private businesses involved in
development projects of regional importance as well as lines of credit to
finance Micro-credit projects and small to medium private enterprises. The
BOAD also funds debt-relief programs to member governments with the agreement
that funds are instead diverted to health programmes particularly those
dealing with HIV/AIDS, education and infrastructure improvements.

## Headquarters

The bank is headquartered in Lome, Togo, in a seven-story modernist building
designed by the French architects Durand, Menard, and Thiebault in 1980.

### Gallery

  * BOAD, Lomé, Togo, 1981

  * BOAD, Lomé, Togo, 1981