Monetary union in Africa

UEMOA

WAMZ

ECOWAS only (Cape Verde)

The **West African Economic and Monetary Union** , generally referred in
English to by its French acronym **UEMOA** (for **Union Économique et
Monétaire Ouest-Africaine**) and alternatively as **WAEMU** , is a treaty-
based arrangement binding together eight West African states, seven of which
were previously colonies of French West Africa. It was established to promote
monetary and financial stability as well as economic integration among
countries that share the West African CFA franc (ISO 4217: XOF) as a common
currency. From 1962 to 1994, it was known as the **West African Monetary
Union** (**WAMU** or, in French, **UMOA** for _Union Monétaire Ouest-
Africaine_).

Territorially, UEMOA mostly overlaps with the larger regional organization,
the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS).

UEMOA common institutions include its Council of Heads of State (French:
_Conférence des Chefs d'État et de Gouvernement_) and Council of Ministers;
Commission, Court of Justice, and Court of Accounts (all in Ouagadougou); the
Central Bank of West African States (BCEAO) in Dakar; the Banking Commission
of the West African Monetary Union (CB-UMOA) and Financial Markets Authority
of the West African Monetary Union (AMF-UMOA), both in Abidjan; and the West
African Development Bank (BOAD) in Lomé. UEMOA countries also share the
Regional Insurance Control Commission (CRCA, in Libreville) with other African
countries of the Franc Zone.

## History

### Background

In late 1945, newly liberated France decided to devalue its currency, the
French franc, but to leave unchanged the monetary parity in its overseas
colonies that had not been affected by similar economic distress. It thus
established the CFA franc (for _Colonies Françaises d'Afrique_) for colonies
in Africa, and the CFP franc (_Colonies Françaises du Pacifique_) for those in
the Pacific Ocean, whereas Caribbean colonies retained use of the French franc
and Indochina used a separate pegged currency, the French Indochinese piastre.

In West Africa, the CFA franc was issued by the Banque de l'Afrique
Occidentale (BAO) under an issuance privilege granted by French national
legislation. In 1955, the BAO was replaced in that role by the public-sector
Institut d'Émission de l'Afrique Occidentale Française et du Togo, which in
turn was renamed the BCEAO in 1959.

### West African Monetary Union

The West African Monetary Union was established in 1962 by treaty between
France and the newly independent countries. The 1962 treaty established an
operations account (French: _compte d'opérations_) at the French Treasury, in
which the participating African countries committed to pool their external
reserves and which also functioned as an overdraft facility. In exchange,
France extended a guarantee ensuring the unlimited convertibility of the CFA
franc into French franc, at a fixed exchange rate of 50 CFA francs to one
French franc (unchanged since a French franc devaluation in October 1948,
notwithstanding the redenomination of 100 old French francs to one new French
franc in 1960).

In 1973, the framework was reformed with a treaty revision and new monetary
cooperation agreement that stipulated the BCEAO's relocation from Paris to
Dakar. The transfer was completed in mid-1978 and the new building inaugurated
in May 1979.

### West African Economic and Monetary Union

UEMOA was created by a Treaty signed at Dakar, Senegal, on 10 January 1994, by
the heads of state and governments of Benin, Burkina Faso, Ivory Coast, Mali,
Niger, Senegal, and Togo.

On 2 May 1997, Guinea-Bissau, a former Portuguese colony, became the
organisation's eighth (and only non-francophone) member state.

On 29 December 2019, a revision of the monetary cooperation agreement with
France led to the termination of the operations account mechanism in January
2020, whereas France maintained its unlimited guarantee of convertibility into
euros.

UEMOA has 32 international operating accounts, spread across ten countries and
eight different currencies, including one at the United States Federal
Reserve.

### Relations with the Alliance of Sahel States

Officially united in another confederation (Alliance of Sahel States) without
a monetary area, these three countries have not shown their intention to break
ties with UEMOA. Leaving UEMOA is therefore a much more complex decision. The
member countries of the union share a single currency, the CFA franc, which is
based on a convertibility guarantee by the French Treasury. If a country
leaves UEMOA, it will have to recover its foreign exchange reserves, currently
divided between the UEMOA Central Bank in Abidjan (50%) and the French
Treasury (50%).

## Overview

UEMOA is a customs union and currency union between its members. Its
objectives include:

  * Greater economic competitiveness, through open markets, in addition to the rationalisation and harmonisation of the legal environment
  * The convergence of macro-economic policies and indicators
  * The creation of a common market
  * The co-ordination of sectoral policies
  * The harmonisation of fiscal policies

Among its achievements, the UEMOA has successfully implemented macro-economic
convergence criteria and an effective surveillance mechanism. It has adopted a
customs union and common external tariff and has combined indirect taxation
regulations, in addition to initiating regional structural and sectoral
policies. A September 2002 IMF survey cited the UEMOA as "the furthest along
the path toward integration" of all the regional groupings in Africa.

However, within the region, there has been a low level of integration with an
increase in income disparities since the creation of UEMOA. Côte d'Ivoire had
the highest GDP per capita in 2022 at US$1,950 while Niger had the lowest one
at US$484. In the same year, Côte d'Ivoire and Senegal alone accounted for
more than 60% of the unions' exports. Additionally, there is a large
discrepancy in countries' economic performance over the 2010 decade; the best
performance was recorded by Côte d'Ivoire (annual growth rate of 6.72%) and
the lowest one by Guinea Bissau (3.85%). However, positive progress has been
made in economic distribution since the foundation of UEMOA, with the mean
dispersion of economic growth in the region being 1.26 before the creation and
0.73 after.

## Interaction with ECOWAS

The Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and UEMOA have
developed a common plan of action on trade liberalisation and macroeconomic
policy convergence. The organizations have also agreed on common rules of
origin to enhance trade, and ECOWAS has agreed to adopt UEMOA's customs
declaration forms and compensation mechanisms.

## Membership

  * Benin (Founding Member)
  * Burkina Faso (Founding Member)
  * Guinea-Bissau (Joined on 2 May 1997)
  * Ivory Coast (Founding Member)
  * Mali (Founding Member)
  * Niger (Founding Member)
  * Senegal (Founding Member)
  * Togo (Founding Member)