Food-assistance branch of the UN

| This article **relies excessively onreferences to primary sources**. Please
improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources.  
_Find sources:_ "World Food Programme" – news **·** newspapers **·** books
**·** scholar **·** JSTOR _( October 2022)__(Learn how and when to remove this
message)_  
---|---  
  
Empty sack of the World Food Programme

The **World Food Programme** (**WFP**) is an international organization within
the United Nations (UN) that provides food assistance worldwide. It is the
world's largest humanitarian organization and the leading provider of school
meals. Founded in 1961, WFP is headquartered in Rome and has offices in 87
countries. In 2023 it supported over 152 million people, and it is present in
more than 120 countries and territories.

In addition to emergency food relief, WFP offers technical and development
assistance, such as building capacity for emergency preparedness and response,
managing supply chains and logistics, promoting social safety programs, and
strengthening resilience against climate change. It is also a major provider
of direct cash assistance, and provides passenger services for humanitarian
workers through its management of the United Nations Humanitarian Air Service
(UNHAS).

WFP is an executive member of the United Nations Sustainable Development
Group, a consortium of UN entities that aims to fulfil the 17 Sustainable
Development Goals (SDG), with a priority to achieve SDG 2, "zero hunger", by
2030.

The World Food Programme was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 2020 for its
efforts to provide food assistance in areas of conflict and to prevent the use
of food as a weapon of war and conflict.

## History

WFP was established in 1961 after the 1960 Food and Agriculture Organization
(FAO) Conference, when George McGovern, director of the US Food for Peace
Programmes, proposed establishing a multilateral food aid programme. WFP
launched its first programmes in 1963 by the FAO and the United Nations
General Assembly on a three-year experimental basis, supporting the Nubian
population at Wadi Halfa in Sudan. In 1965, the programme was extended to a
continuing basis.

## Background

WFP works across a broad spectrum of Sustainable Development Goals. Food
shortages, hunger, malnutrition, and foodborne illness lead to poor health,
which affects other areas of sustainable development, such as education,
employment, and poverty (Sustainable Development Goals Four, Eight, and One
respectively).

## Funding

WFP operations are primarily funded by voluntary donations by governments
worldwide, along with contributions from corporations and private donors. In
2022, funding reached a record USD 14.1 billion—up by almost 50 percent from
2021—against an operational funding need of USD 21.4 billion. The United
States was the largest donor.

In 2023, the WFP received USD 8.3 billion in funding, likely marking the first
time since 2010 that funding decreased from the previous year, creating a
funding gap of 64%.

In February 2025, the WFP received directives from the U.S. to halt operations
on numerous U.S.-funded grants, despite an emergency waiver issued by
Secretary of State Marco Rubio intended to allow essential food assistance to
continue. These grants, managed by the U.S. Agency for International
Development (USAID), are valued at tens of millions of dollars and are
instrumental in providing food aid to countries such as Yemen, the Democratic
Republic of Congo, Sudan, South Sudan, the Central African Republic, Haiti,
and Mali. The suspension encompasses several projects under the Food for Peace
Title II program, which annually allocates approximately $2 billion for the
donation of U.S. commodities and constitutes a significant portion of U.S.
international food assistance. This program is jointly administered by the
U.S. Department of Agriculture and USAID.

## Organization

### Governance, leadership and staff

WFP is governed by an executive board that consists of representatives of 36
member states and provides intergovernmental support, direction, and
supervision of WFP's activities. Of the 36 board members, 18 are elected by
the United Nations Economic and Social Council and 18 by the Food and
Agriculture Organization. The European Union is a permanent observer in WFP
and, as a major donor, participates in the work of its executive board. WFP is
headed by an executive director, who is appointed jointly by the UN Secretary-
General and the director-general of the Food and Agriculture Organization
(FAO) of the United Nations. The executive director is appointed for fixed
five-year terms and is responsible for the administration of the organization
as well as the implementation of its programmes, projects, and other
activities. Cindy McCain, previously Ambassador and Permanent Representative
of the United States Mission to the United Nations Food and Agriculture
Agencies in Rome, was appointed to the role in March 2023.

In March 2023, WFP had over 22,300 staff.

The headquarters in Rome

#### List of executive directors

Since 1992, all executive directors have been American. The following is a
chronological list of those who have served as executive director of the World
Food Programme:

  1. Addeke Hendrik Boerma ( Netherlands) (May 1962 – December 1967)
  2. Sushil K. Dev ( India) (January 1968 – August 1968) (acting)
  3. Francisco Aquino ( El Salvador) (July 1968 – May 1976)
  4. Thomas C. M. Robinson ( United States) (May 1976 – June 1977 acting; July 1977 – September 1977)
  5. Garson N. Vogel ( Canada) (October 1977 – April 1981)
  6. Bernardo de Azevedo Brito ( Brazil) (May 1981 – February 1982) (acting)
  7. Juan Felipe Yriart ( Uruguay) (February 1982 – April 1982) (acting)
  8. James Ingram ( Australia) (April 1982 – April 1992)
  9. Catherine Bertini ( United States) (April 1992 – April 2002)
  10. James T. Morris ( United States) (April 2002 – April 2007)
  11. Josette Sheeran ( United States) (April 2007 – April 2012)
  12. Ertharin Cousin ( United States) (April 2012 – April 2017)
  13. David Beasley ( United States) (April 2017 – April 2023)
  14. Cindy McCain ( United States) (Since April 2023)

## Activities

### Emergencies

WFP truck in Dnipro, Ukraine, during Russian invasion in Ukraine.

About two-thirds of WFP life-saving food assistance goes to people facing high
degrees of food insecurity, predominantly resulting from violence and armed
conflict. Over 60% of the people facing hunger globally live in regions
experiencing armed violence, which compounds with increased displacement,
destruction of food systems, and increased humanitarian access challenges to
pose massive risks to food security in the regions. In 2023, more than 300
million people faced acute hunger globally. WFP said it had "reached 152
million people with essential aid" in 2023.

The latest Hunger Hotspots outlook released June 2024 and co-published by WFP
and FAO, emphasised that "acute food insecurity is likely to deteriorate
further in 18 hotspots" between June and October 2024. These countries and
country clusters face famine or risk of famine, with population already in or
facing IPC Phase 5 (Catastrophe). Of those countries, Haiti, Mali, Palestine,
South Sudan, and Sudan are classified as the most concerning.

WFP is also a first responder to sudden-onset emergencies. When floods struck
Sudan in July 2020, it provided emergency food assistance to nearly 160,000
people. WFP provided food as well as vouchers for people to buy vital
supplies, while also planning recovery, reconstruction, and resilience-
building activities, after Cyclone Idai struck Mozambique and floods washed an
estimated 400,000 hectares of crops on early 2019.

WFP's emergency support is also preemptive in offsetting the potential impact
of disasters. In the Sahel region of Africa, amidst economic challenges,
climate change, and armed militancy, WFP's activities included working with
communities and partners to harvest water for irrigation, restore degraded
land, and support livelihoods through skills training. It uses early-warning
systems to help communities prepare for disasters. In Bangladesh, weather
forecasting led to the distribution of cash to vulnerable farmers to pay for
measures such as reinforcing their homes or stockpiling food ahead of heavy
flooding.

The World Food Program hands off high-energy biscuits to civilians at a
Liberian port during the Second Civil War.

WFP is the lead agency of the Logistics Cluster, a coordination mechanism
established by the Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC). It also co-leads
the Food Security Cluster. The WFP-managed United Nations Humanitarian Air
Service (UNHAS) serves over 300 destinations globally. WFP also manages the
United Nations Humanitarian Response Depot (UNHRD), a global network of hubs
that procure, store and transport emergency supplies for the organization and
the wider humanitarian community. WFP logistical support, including its air
service and hubs, has enabled staff and supplies from WFP and partner
organizations to reach areas where commercial flights have not been available
during the COVID-19 pandemic.

### Climate change

WFP took pre-emptive action to reduce the impact of floods in Bangladesh.
Photo: WFP/Sayed Asif Mahmud

WFP provided cash to vulnerable groups ahead of torrential rains in Bangladesh
in July 2019. Its response to Hurricane Dorian in the Bahamas in September
2019 was assisted by a regional office in Barbados, which had been set up the
previous year to enable better disaster preparedness and response. In advance
of Dorian, WFP deployed technical experts in food security, logistics and
emergency telecommunication to support a rapid needs assessment. Assessment
teams also conducted an initial aerial reconnaissance mission with the aim to
put teams on the ground as soon as possible.

### Nutrition

A child holds a WFP supplementary, specialized food to treat malnutrition
among children, at a WFP-supported nutrition clinic in Yemen. Photo: WFP/Issa-
Al-Raghi.

WFP works with governments, other UN agencies, NGOs and the private sector,
increasing food security, supporting nutrition interventions, policies and
programmes, that include school meals and food fortification.

### School meals

A child eats a WFP school meal in Lao. Photo: WFP/Vilakhone Sipaseuth

School meals encourage parents in vulnerable families to send their children
to school, rather than work. They have proved highly beneficial in areas
including education and gender equality, health and nutrition, social
protection, local economies and agriculture. WFP works with partners to ensure
school feeding is part of integrated school health and nutrition programmes,
which include services such as malaria control, menstrual hygiene and guidance
on sanitation and hygiene.

### Smallholder farmers

WFP is a member of a global consortium that forms the Farm to Market Alliance,
which helps smallholder farmers receive information, investment and support,
so they can produce and sell marketable surplus and increase their income. WFP
connects smallholder farmers to markets in more than 40 countries.

In 2008, WFP coordinated the five-year Purchase for Progress (P4P) pilot
project. P4P assists smallholding farmers by offering them opportunities to
access agricultural markets and become competitive players in the marketplace.
The project spanned across 20 countries in Africa, Asia, and Latin America and
trained 800,000 farmers in improved agricultural production, post-harvest
handling, quality assurance, group marketing, agricultural finance, and
contracting with WFP. The project resulted in 366,000 metric tons of food
produced and generated more than US$148 million in income for its smallholder
farmers.

### Asset creation

WFP's Food Assistance for Assets (FFA) programme provides cash or food-based
transfers to address recipients' immediate food needs, while they build or
boost assets, such as repairing irrigation systems, bridges, and land and
water management activities.

FFA reflects WFP's drive towards food assistance and development rather than
food aid and dependency. It does this by focusing on the assets and their
impact on people and communities rather than on the work to realize them, a
shift away from previous approaches such as Food or Cash for Work programmes
and large public works programmes.

### Cash assistance

A beneficiary shows the humanitarian assistance card she used to receive money
at a WFP cash transfer point in Niger. Photo: WFP/Simon Pierre Diouf

WFP uses cash transfers such as physical banknotes, a debit card or vouchers,
aiming to give more choices to aid recipients and encourage the funds to be
invested back into local economies. During the first half of 2022, WFP
delivered US$1.6 billion in cash to 37 million people in 70 countries to
alleviate hunger. A 2022 study by the Oxford Poverty and Human Development
Initiative concluded that the Emergency Social Safety Net (ESSN) cash
programme "significantly reduced the incidence and intensity of
multidimensional poverty" among the people receiving cash transfers.

### Capacity building

In the most climate disaster-prone provinces of the Philippines, WFP is
providing emergency response training and equipment to local government units,
and helping set up automated weather stations.

### Digital innovation

WFP's digital transformation centres on deploying the latest technologies and
data to help achieve zero hunger. The WFP Innovation Accelerator has sourced
and supported more than 60 projects spanning 45 countries. In 2017, WFP
launched the Building Blocks programme. It aims to distribute money-for-food
assistance to Syrian refugees in Jordan. The project uses blockchain
technology to digitize identities and allow refugees to receive food by eye
scanning. WFP's low-tech hydroponics kits allow refugees to grow barley that
feed livestock in the Sahara desert. The SMP PLUS software is an AI-powered
menu creation tool for school meals programmes worldwide

### Partnerships

WFP works with governments, the private sector, UN agencies, international
finance groups, academia, and more than 1,000 non-governmental organisations.
The WFP, the UN Food and Agriculture Organization, and the International Fund
for Agricultural Development reaffirmed their joint efforts to end global
hunger, particularly amid the COVID-19 pandemic, during a joint meeting of
their governing bodies in October 2020. In the United States, Washington,
D.C.–based 501(c)(3) organization World Food Program USA supports the WFP. The
American organisation frequently donates to the WFP, though the two are
separate entities for taxation purposes.

### Aid transparency

WFP joined the International Aid Transparency Initiative (IATI) in 2013 as its
150th member and has regularly published data since then using the identifier
XM-DAC-41140. The organisation was assessed by Publish What You Fund and
included in the 2024 Aid Transparency Index with an overall score of 84.5,
which is categorised as a "very good" score.

## Countries of operation

### Afghanistan

14.8 million people have acute food insecurity.

### Yemen

19.5 million people need humanitarian assistance and 17.1 million are food
insecure.

## Reviews

### Recognition and awards

WFP won the 2020 Nobel Peace Prize for its "efforts for combating hunger", its
"contribution to creating peace in conflicted-affected areas", and for acting
as a driving force in efforts to prevent the use of food as a weapon of war
and conflict. Receiving the award, executive David Beasley called for
billionaires to "step up" and help source the US$5 billion WFP needs to save
30 million people from famine.

### Challenges

In 2018, the Center for Global Development ranked WFP last in a study of 40
aid programmes, based on indicators grouped into four themes: maximising
efficiency, fostering institutions, reducing burdens, and transparency and
learning. These indicators relate to aid effectiveness principles developed at
the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness (2005), the Accra Agenda for Action
(2008), and the Busan Partnership Agreement (2011).

There is wide general debate on the net effectiveness of aid, including
unintended consequences such as increasing the duration of conflicts and
increasing corruption. WFP faces difficult decisions in working with some
regimes.

Some surveys have shown internal culture problems at WFP, including sexual
harassment.