# 9

# The STudy of IndIan dIaSpora

#### N. Jayaram\*

# **Introduction**

The emigration of Indians to other countries has a long history. The settlement of Indians in the countries of their adoption and the socio-cultural and political dynamics thereof had earlier attracted sporadic interest among scholars as well as administrators. The phenomenon is now encapsulated under the fashionable term 'Indian diaspora',1 and its study has emerged as a rich and variegated area of multidisciplinary research interest.

The first systematic attempt to take stock of the literature on *Indian Diaspora* (though under the rubric 'Indian Communities Abroad') was undertaken by Ravindra K. Jain as part of the Third Survey of Literature on Sociology and Social Anthropology, under the auspices of the Indian Council of Social Science Research (ICSSR), covering the publications up to 1989. It was published as an independent monograph (Jain 1993). More comprehensive bibliographies have since been compiled by N. Jayaram (2004b) and as part of *The Encyclopedia of the Indian Diaspora* (Lal 2006: 402–09).

This chapter seeks to present a state-of-the-art survey on *Indian Diaspora*, highlighting the heterogeneous and complex nature of the phenomenon encompassed by it and emphasizing the transdisciplinary nature of its academic enterprise. The perspective adopted in this survey is that of 'sociology of sociology' (see Tiryakian 1971) which, with reference to *Indian Diaspora,* involves appraising this transdisciplinary area of study and the phenomenon encompassed by it from the vantage point of sociology. The survey documents the thematic and geographical coverage by the literature on *Indian Diaspora*, and analyses the trends in scholarship in it. The gaps in our knowledge about the Indian diaspora, identified In the survey of literature, are built into the main line of analysis, thus

\*I thank Professor Yogesh Atal for inviting me to undertake this challenging but stimulating academic endeavour and for his perceptive comments on the first draft of this essay. I also thank Professor Ravindra K. Jain and Dr Aparna Rayaprol for their suggestions at the ICSSR Workshop in New Delhi on 8–9 March 2007 where this essay was presented in absentia. It was Professor Brinsley Samaroo of the Department of History at The University of the West Indies (St. Augustine) who enkindled in me an interest in the study of the Indian diaspora and guided me through it initially.

indicating the scope for further research on a specific aspect or issue of the Indian diaspora.

The present chapter surveys the literature on *Indian Diaspora* published during 1989–2006. It is divided into six parts: the first part examines the concept of diaspora as applied to the migration and settlement of Indians abroad. Tracing the history of the Indian diaspora through the ages, the second part analyses its phases and patterns. Based on an analytical framework developed by Jayaram (2004a: 22–31) for the study of *Indian Diaspora*, the third part surveys the literature in the areas and points out the gaps in knowledge thereof. Next is examined the key disciplinary perspectives and strategic approaches adopted followed by a look at the prospects of *Indian Diaspora* becoming a part of university curriculum. The final section offers some concluding observations.

A point on the style of presentation is in order. To avoid the analysis being cluttered with repeated references and avoidable descriptive details, citations have been kept to the minimum. In the text, studies have been cited only to illustrate or substantiate the points made. To facilitate reference, catalogues of key studies by country/region and religion of the diasporic community are given in notes 8 and 9 respectively (see the section on the survey of literalise on *Indian Diaspora*). For an exhaustive listing of the studies on the subject conducted during 1989–2006, the reader is invited to peruse the 'References'.

# **The Indian Diaspora: Reality and Concept**

People of the Indian subcontinent have migrated to different countries for various reasons at various periods of its history. Among the immigrants of diverse nationalities, overseas Indians constitute a sizeable segment. It is estimated that besides six million Indian citizens, there are more than twenty million people of Indian origin all over the world. Taking 10,000 as the minimum figure, overseas Indians are found in as many as 50 countries, and in seven more countries they number between 5,000 and 10,000. In as many as six countries (Malaysia, Myanmar, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, the United Kingdom, and the United States of America), their number is more than a million.2 The People of Indian Origin (PIO) form the single largest ethnic community in Fiji (49 per cent), Guyana (53 per cent), Mauritius (74 per cent), Trinidad and Tobago (40 per cent), and Surinam (37 per cent). They form substantial minority communities in Asian countries like Hong Kong, Malaysia, Singapore, and Sri Lanka, and in South Africa and East Africa. They have a significant presence in Australia, Canada, the United Kingdom, and the United States of America.

Lately, the existence and experience of overseas Indians, their problems and prospects, their aspirations and anxieties, their achievements and failings, their interests and orientations, and so on, are being discussed under the rubric 'the Indian diaspora'. This phrase has become popular and fashionable and is widely used. The popularity of the phrase 'the Indian diaspora' does not, however, mean that there is clarity on its usage and consensus over its definition. The wider currency of the term seems only to have led to terminological confusion, making a serious scholar doubt its analytical utility itself.

The phenomenon of 'Indian diaspora' has immense theoretical import both in the conventional disciplines of anthropology, economics, history, political science and sociology, and in the emergent areas such as 'cultural studies', 'gender studies', and 'international relations'. Moreover, its practical significance in diplomacy and international relations, on the one hand, and socio-economic and political dynamics within India, on the other, can hardly be exaggerated.

Two points need to be clarified here. First, the scholarly interest in the study of the Indian diaspora predates the coinage of the phrase, that is, its semantic adaptation from its original referent to refer to overseas Indians. For more than a century now, social scientists, especially anthropologists and historians, and diplomats have studied overseas Indians and produced a large body of informative and insightful literature on the subject (see Jain 1993; Jayaram 2004b; Lal 2006: 402–09). However, they never thought of applying the term 'diaspora' to encapsulate the phenomenon that they studied. For instance, the special number of the *Sociological Bulletin* (1989) devoted to this theme was titled 'Indians Abroad'. None of the Indian sociologists contributing to that volume used the term 'diaspora' in their essays. The only contributor who used the term—twice in the main text, there times in the endnotes, and five times in the references (all published in North America)—was the Canadian anthropologist Norman Buchignani (1989). Interestingly, the review of literature on the focal theme for the Third ICSSR Survey of Research in Sociology and Anthropology was entitled *Indian Communities Abroad* (Jain 1993).

Thus, the adaptation of the term 'diaspora' to refer to overseas Indians is of recent origin, but the growth in its usage in scholarly discussions and literature during the last 10 years has been remarkable. The University Grants Commission (UGC) established in 1995 the Centre for the Study of Indian Diaspora at the University of Hyderabad.3 The ICSSR has incorporated it as a distinct topic in its *Journal of Abstracts and Reviews: Sociology and Social Anthropology* since 1999 (vol. 28). The fourth volume under the series 'Themes in Indian Sociology', sponsored by the Indian Sociological Society to mark its golden jubilee, is entitled *The Indian Diaspora: Dynamics of Migration* (see Jayaram 2004c). The UGC Model Curriculum in Sociology, circulated in 2001, recommended 'The Study of Indian Diaspora' as an Elective Course (E 13), and some universities have introduced this course of study. Several symposia, seminars, and conferences have been organized on 'the Indian diaspora' under the auspices of such agencies or institutions as the Centre de Sciences Humanines de New Delhi, Global Organisation of People of Indian Origin (GOPIO, New York), India International Centre, Indian Sociological Society, Indo-Canadian Shastri Institute, etc., besides universities in India and abroad.

What explains the growing popularity of the phrase 'Indian diaspora' in the academic discourse on Indians and the Indian communities living outside India? What are the ontological underpinnings of the adaptation of the term 'diaspora' to refer to overseas Indians? What are the epistemological implications thereof, especially when the discourse is carried on in an Indian language? Obviously, it would be simplistic to dismiss the usage of the phrase 'Indian diaspora' by explaining it as an intellectual fad or as yet another instance of the uncritical terminological borrowing from the West. As with many a social science concept, 'diaspora' too has seldom been problematized in the Indian context. Significant as it definitely is, delving into such problematization is, regrettably, beyond the scope of this study.

The second point is that while the coinage of the phrase 'Indian diaspora' is nascent, the term 'diaspora' itself is not new; it is ancient. Etymologically, the term 'diaspora' is derived from the Greek composite verb *dia-* and *speirein* (infinitive), literally meaning 'to scatter', 'to spread', or 'to disperse'. It was originally used to refer to the dispersion of the Jews after the Babylonian exile in 586 BE and to the aggregate of Jews or Jewish communities scattered in exile outside Palestine. In current parlance, however, the term is applied to describe any group of people who are so dispersed (see Baumann 2000; see also Clifford 1994).

In its transference from the specific original referent—the exile of Jews from their homeland—to a general descriptive label for dispersion of a section of a given population, the apparent similarity of migration (that is, the physical movement of people from one habitat to another) is recognized, but the ontological essence of the Jewish migration is lost. Concerning the Jews, the term diaspora essentially connotes two interrelated realities, namely, the experience of *exile from* the homeland and the *orientation to* the Promised Land. Both these realities have remained an integral part of the idea of *diaspora* among the Jews for more than two millennia. As an integral part of their social psyche and cultural ethos, it has been a determinant of their society, polity and culture for decades since the establishment of the Jewish Republic of Israel in 1948.

With such a historical and ontological undergirding, the uncritical application of the concept of diaspora to *any* international dispersion or migration of a section or sections of a population would be theoretically muddled and practically problematic. The confusion around the phrase 'Indian diaspora' becomes even more confounded considering the fact that the boundary of what is called 'India' has not remained the same even during the last two hundred years. Thus, for those who left 'India' before Partition (in 1947) and their descendants, the reference point is 'the subcontinental India' (which included the present-day Pakistan and Bangladesh); whereas for those leaving 'India' after Partition, it is the political state of India as it exists now. For many who experienced Partition, the reference point is often ambivalent.

Notwithstanding the resulting terminological conundrum, with the phrase 'Indian diaspora' having become popular, both in the academia and in the media, it is extremely difficult, if not impossible, to avoid its usage. Nevertheless, to avoid further confusion, it is advisable, as with many social science concepts, to avoid discussing 'the Indian diaspora' in isolation from the socio-historical and politico-economic context in which an Indian diasporic community is located. In other words, theoretically, 'the Indian diaspora' is a relativistic construct; empirically, it is heterogeneous in manifestation.

# **Phases and Patterns of the Indian Diaspora**

To start with, two main phases of emigration of Indians to other countries can be distinguished: (i) 'overseas emigration in the nineteenth century', and (ii) 'twentieth century migration to industrially developed countries'. For analytical convenience, these could be termed the colonial and the post-colonial phases of the Indian diaspora. It is, no doubt, possible to identify overlaps between these two phases: The emigration of Indians that began in the second quarter of the nineteenth century continued into the early decades of the twentieth century. The trickle of emigration of Indians to the industrially developed countries, which assumed phenomenal proportions in the post-colonial phase, could be noticed in the nineteenth century itself. Nevertheless, it is important to recognize the distinctive nature of these two phases of emigration, for their varying causes, courses, and consequences.

Studies on the Indian diaspora have largely focused on one or the other of these phases. This is easy to understand considering the magnitude of the populations involved, and the variegated nature of their economic status and political predicament in different diasporic situations. Furthermore, some of these diasporic communities have been topical, or their members themselves have begun manifesting an acute sense of community self-awareness. Not less important, in many of these cases, archival records and other secondary data can be found with greater ease, and the conventional techniques of historical, anthropological, and sociological research can be easily adopted.

#### *Indian Diaspora in Ancient Times*

It should be emphasized, however, that the emigration of Indians has a much longer history than what the reference point of colonialism seems to suggest. In the history of ancient India, one comes across accounts of the Buddhist *bhikkus* who travelled into remote corners of Central and Eastern Asia. The maritime history of pre-colonial India records evidence of continuous contact between the kingdoms of the Coromandel Coast and the islands of South-East Asia. There are ample references of the contact of Palas of Bengal with the Sailendra kings of Indonesia and the expeditions of the south Indian Cholas that vanquished the great Indonesian empire of Sri Vijaya (see Tinker 1977: 1). Several elements of the Hindu and Buddhist religion, mythology, and culture have survived in South-East Asia, and most notably in Thailand and Bali (see Howe 2001; Smith, 1958). 'Yet none of these contacts led to a distinctive Indian population overseas' (Tinker 1977: 1).

The trade with East Africa, however, led to a permanent Indian settlement there. In a footnote, William H. McNeill observes that '…there is some reason to think that a colony of Indian merchants lived permanently in Memphis, Egypt, from about 500 BC' (1963: 210). In the nineteenth century, when 'European explorers like Burton first ventured into the interior [in Africa] they were guided on their way by Indian merchants' (Tinker 1977: 2–3). These early migrants to East Africa belonged mainly to small trading communities like the Ismailis, Bohras, and Banyas of the Gujarat region. Their counterparts covering Ceylon (now renamed Sri Lanka), Burma (now renamed Mynmar), Malaysia, Thailand, and Indonesia were mainly Nattukkottai Chettyars of Chettinad in the Tamil region of south India.

The role of Indian merchants and trading communities in international transactions is now an important topic of research among economic historians. For instance, the role of the Indian merchants in Eurasian trade during 1600–1750 is documented by Stephen Frederic Dale (1994) and in the anthology *India and Central Asia: Cultural, Economic and Political Links* edited by Surendra Gopal (2001). Claude Markovits (2000) provides a historical account of the 'global world of Indian merchants', focusing on the Sindhi traders during 1750–1947 (see also Alam 1994; Levi 2002). Mark-Anthony Falzon (2005) has a richly nuanced ethnography of the Hindu Sindhi diaspora during 1860–2000.

Even so, research on the pre-colonial Indian diaspora is scant and sketchy. Even the available data is scattered in historical works. Documenting the sources of such data is necessary. With the help of historians, compiling the basic research material on the subject may even be possible.

#### *Indian Diaspora During European Colonialism*

As for the magnitude of the emigration and its spread, the European colonization, marked by the penetration of mercantile capitalism in Asia, was the most crucial phase in the Indian diaspora. The integration of peripheral economies into the emerging world capitalist system, the onset of a revolution in transportation and communication, and the opening of the Suez Canal facilitated large-scale emigration of Indians into far-off lands.

The phenomenal trade surpluses earned by the European mercantile class in the wake of geographical discoveries were invested in mines and plantations in Asia, Africa, and elsewhere. This created an enormous demand for a cheap and regulated labour force. By the first quarter of the nineteenth century, the demand for labour was accentuated by the ever-expanding colonial economy, the growing opposition to slavery, and its eventual abolition (by England in 1833, by France in 1848, and by Holland in 1863), and the inability of the European countries to meet the shortfall in labour by deploying their own labour force. A combination of factors made India (and China) an extant reservoir of cheap, docile, and dependable labour, especially to work on the plantations.

Tinker (1993) provides one of the most comprehensive surveys of the emigration of Indian labour overseas during the colonial era. Walton Look Lai (1993), K.O. Laurence (1994), Selvakumaran Ramachandran (1994), David Northrup (1995), Ian H. vanden Driesen (1997) and Madhavi Kale (1998) too provide extensive historical analyses of this migration. Marina Carter and Torabully Khal (2002) have compiled an anthology on 'coolitude'—the Indian labour in diaspora during the colonial era. Indians in Mauritius during 1834–74 (Carter 1995), in Natal during 1860–1902 (Bhana 1991; see also Bhana and Brain 1990), in British Guiana during 1894–1901 (Seecharan 1999; see also Bisnauth 2000; Mangru 1993, 1996), and in Fiji (Lal 2000; Naidu 2004) have been the focus of exclusive socio-historical studies.

Broadly, three distinct patterns of Indian emigration are identifiable in this period: (i) 'indentured' labour emigration; (ii) '*kangani*' and '*maistry*' labour emigration; and (iii) 'passage' or 'free' emigration. The indentured labour emigration, so called after the contract4 signed by the individual labourer to work on plantations, was officially sponsored by the colonial government. It began in 1834 and ended in 1920. The overwhelming majority of the labour emigrants under this system were recruited from north India. These labour emigrants were taken to the British colonies of British Guiana, Fiji, Trinidad, and Jamaica; the French colonies of Guadalupe and Martinique; and the Dutch colony of Surinam.

The *kangani* (derived from the Tamil *kankani*, meaning foreman or overseer) system prevailed in the recruitment of labour for emigration to Ceylon and Malaya (see Heidemann 1992). A variant of this system, called the *maistry* (derived from the Tamil *maistry*, meaning supervisor) system, was practised in the recruitment of labour for emigration to Burma. The *kangani* or *maistry* (himself an Indian immigrant) recruited families of Tamil labourers from villages in the erstwhile Madras Presidency. The labourers so recruited were legally free, as they were not bound by any contract or fixed period of service. These systems, which began in the first and third quarter of the nineteenth century, were abolished in 1938.

Emigration from India did not cease with the abolition of indenture and other systems of organized export of labour (see Tinker 1976). There was a steady trickle of emigration of members of the trading communities from Gujarat and Punjab to South Africa and East Africa (Kenya, Tanzania, and Uganda), and those from south India to South East Asia.5 Most labourers emigrated to East Africa to work on the construction of railroads. These emigrants were not officially sponsored: they paid their own 'passage', and they were 'free' in the sense that they were not bound by any contract.

#### *Indian Diaspora in the Post-Colonial Period*

A new and significant phase of emigration began after India became independent in 1947. Broadly, three patterns can be identified in the post-independence emigration: (i) the emigration of professionals and semi-professionals to the industrially advanced countries like England, the United States of America, and Canada; (ii) the emigration of skilled and unskilled labourers to West Asia; and (iii) the emigration of Anglo-Indians to Australia and England.

The large-scale and steady emigration of doctors, engineers, scientists, teachers, and other semi-professionals to the industrially advanced countries of the West is essentially a post-independence phenomenon, and particularly so of the late 1960s and 1970s (see Prakash C. Jain 1989a; Khadria 1999a, 1999b; Naidu 1991). It declined to a considerable extent with the adoption of stringent immigration regulations by the recipient countries. But it has regained momentum in the wake of globalization and the growing demand for computer and information technology professionals (see Biao 2001, 2004) and semi-professionals like nurses. This pattern of emigration, often described as 'brain drain' (Khadria 1999a, 2004a, 2004b, 2005), is essentially voluntary and mostly individual in nature. With the second and subsequent generations having emerged, and the emigrants enjoying economic prosperity and socio cultural rights, this stream of emigration has resulted in vibrant Indian communities abroad.

To be contrasted with this is the migration of skilled and unskilled labourers to West Asia in the wake of the 'oil boom' there (see Khadria 2004c; Sasikumar 1995). This migration is voluntary in nature, but its trends and conditions are determined by labour market vagaries. It is predominantly male migration, characterized by uninterrupted ties with the families and communities back in India. This cannot be otherwise, as in many West Asian countries the immigrant labourers cannot settle down, and have neither property rights nor the freedom to practise their own religion (other than Islam).

The emigration of the Anglo-Indians is one of the least studied facets of Indian diaspora. Feeling marginalized in the aftermath of India's independence, many of these descendants of intermarriage between Indians and the English left India for England in the first instance. Finding that they were not racially and ethnically acceptable to the English, several of them emigrated to Australia and New Zealand, which have become a second 'homeland' to a significant section of the Anglo-Indians.

Brief as it may be, the foregoing analysis of the phases and patterns of Indian diaspora is sufficient to highlight the complex and variegated nature of the phenomenon. As such, the scope of *Indian Diaspora* as an area of academic study encompasses a variety of topics. Based on a schematic catalogue of important themes and issues which can be and/or have been pursued under the rubric *Indian Diaspora* (see Jayaram 2004a: 22–31), we shall now turn to a survey of the literature on the subject published during 1989–2005. The research questions raised by these themes and issues, it must be noted, can hardly be addressed exclusively by any conventional discipline from its own theoretical and conceptual apparatuses. In other words, *Indian Diaspora* as an area of academic study is necessarily multidisciplinary in nature.

# *Survey of Literature on* Indian diaspora

A cursory glance at the items listed in the References is sufficient to show how large is the body of literature that has been produced on the Indian diaspora since 1989, the year with which Ravindra K. Jain's (1993) pioneering survey on the subject concluded. As many as 220 books and 248 articles (in journals/edited books)—totalling 468 publications3 have appeared in a span of 18 years, giving an average of over eight books and nearly 13 articles per year. To this, if we added the scores of essays in anthologies, compilations and seminar/conference proceedings on the subject, the number of publications would go up considerably. Thus, till 2006, in all 67 collected/edited works could be documented, of which 50 have been published during the current survey period. These include *general anthologies* (Bates 2001; Brennan and Lal 1998; Brown and Foot, 1994; Carter and Khal, 2002; Clarke et al. 1990; Gosine 1992, 1994; Jacobsen and Kumar 2004; Jayaram 2004c; Kurian and Srivastava 1983; Motwani et al. 1993; Paranjape 2001; Schwartz 1967; Singh 1979; Singh and Singh 2003; *Sociological Bulletin*  1989; Vertovec 1991a); compilations of region- or country-specific essays (on the Asia Pacific region, by Ghosh and Chatterjee 2004; Canada*,* by Israel 1987; Kanungo 1984; Ujimoto and Hirabayashi 1980; on East Africa*,* by Ghai 1970; on Fiji and the Pacific Islands, by Crocombe 1981; Subramani 1979; on the Middle East, by Abella and Atal 1986; on Singapore, by Walker 1994; on South Africa, by Arkin et al. 1989; on South East Asia and South Asia, by Sandhu and Mani 1993;

| Year           | Articles | Books | Total |
|----------------|----------|-------|-------|
| Before 1988    | 2        | 20    | 22    |
| 1988–90        | 22       | 17    | 39    |
| 1991–93        | 43       | 37    | 80    |
| 1994–96        | 40       | 45    | 85    |
| 1997–99        | 38       | 30    | 68    |
| 2000–02        | 38       | 39    | 77    |
| 2003–05        | 58       | 25    | 83    |
| 2006           | 7        | 5     | 12    |
| Year not given | -        | 2     | 2     |
| Total          | 248      | 220   | 468   |

**Table 9.1** yearly frequency of diaspora Studies

*Source:* Author's own.

Singh 1982, 1984; on New Zealand, by Tiwari 1980; on the United Kingdom, by Ali et al. 2006; Ballard 1994a; Burghart 1987; Coward et al. 2000; on Trinidad and the Caribbean, by Birbalsingh 1989; Dabydeen and Samaroo 1987, 1996; Gosine [with Malik and Mahabir] 1995; Gosine and Narine, 1999; LaGuerre, 1985; Singh, 1987; and on the United States of America, by Bahri and Vasudeva 1996; Chandrasekhar 1983; Gosine 1990b; Shankar and Srikanth, 1998); compilations of the Sikh diaspora Barrier and Dusenbery 1989; reviews of writings on Indo-Caribbean culture and society (Vertovec 1991b); and 'A symposium on Indian-Americans and the motherland' (*Seminar* 2004).

Thus, the annual academic output on *Indian Diaspora* during the survey period appears to be significantly higher than what it was in the years preceding it. What explains this growing academic interest in the Indian diaspora? The study of *Indian Diaspora*, like that of any other diaspora, is transdisciplinary in nature and it has attracted the attention of scholars from a variety of disciplines (see the section on the approaches to the study of the Indian diaspora). Furthermore, besides the Indian and diasporic Indian scholars, it has also attracted the attention of scholars from outside India and of the Indian diaspora. The growing interest in the study of diaspora has resulted in the publication of a thematic journal, *Diaspora: A Journal of Transnational Studies*<sup>6</sup> and the establishment of transnational centres in many universities abroad. This is hardly surprising in the age of globalization characterized by the international movement of populations (Cohen 1995).

The literature on the Indian diaspora published during the period of the present survey covers almost all the countries and regions where diasporic Indians have a significant presence.7 Turning to religion, an important marker in the diaspora, most of the religions existing in India have been covered in their diasporic avatar, too.8 The focus on religion as an ethnic binder among the Indian diasporic community, as also among the diaspora in general, constitutes a new dimension in the study of sociology of religion.

It is not surprising that scholars in the Indian diaspora have written on their own diasporic predicament; for instance, Vanaja Dhruvarajan and Harjot Oberoi in Canada; Brij V. Lal in Fiji; Basdeo Mangru and Clem Seecharan in Guyana; R. Santhiram in Malaysia; Vinesh Y. Hookoomsing in Mauritius; Indira Arumugam in Singapore; Vishnu Padayachee in South Africa; Patricia Mohammed, Nasser Mustapha, Marianne Ramesar, and Brinsley Samaroo in Trinidad; Parminder Bhachu in UK; Madhulika S. Khandelwal and Sandhya Shukla in USA. Several Indian scholars have taken an interest in the study of the Indian diaspora in different parts of the world, for instance, Chandrashekar Bhat in England; Paramjit S. Judge in Canada and the United Kingdom; Surendra K. Gupta in Thailand; Prakash C. Jain in South Africa; Ravindra K. Jain in Malaysia and Trinidad; N. Jayaram in Trinidad; S.R. Mehta in Mauritius; and Archana Verma in Canada. The diasporic Indians have also attracted the academic attention of non-Indian scholars in the countries of their settlement: Roger Ballard in the United Kingdom; Claire Burkert in Nepal; Alleyn Diesel, in South Africa; Raymond L.M. Lee in Malaysia; Johanna Lessinger in United States of America; Darini Rajasingham-Senanayake in Sri Lanka; Selwyn Ryan in Trinidad; and Verene A. Shepherd in Jamaica. More important, scholars not belonging to the Indian diaspora or its location too have shown sustained interest in the study of the Indian diaspora, for instance, Xiang Biao, Morton Klass, Peter van der Veer, Steven Vertovec, and Carmen Voigt-Graf.

It must be pointed out, however, that the academic interest in the study of diaspora is neither uniform nor is it necessarily sustained among all scholars. In the references (listing 509 items), most scholars find only one, or at the most, two entries against their name. The number of scholars who have three or more entries against their name is 26; those with six or more, are only nine. With 17 entries against his name, Steven Vertovec is naturally regarded as a leading authority on diaspora studies, including *Indian Diaspora*. In brief, scholarly interest in *Indian Diaspora* is more extensive and broad-based than intensive and sustained. In what follows let us try to understand the scope of *Indian Diaspora* in terms of the knowledge that has been produced/refined during the current survey period and the gaps thereof.

#### *Demography of Population Movements*

The key demographic aspects of the migration of people from the Indian subcontinent during various *periods* constitute a basic focus of the study of *Indian Diaspora*. During different periods, the *magnitude* of people emigrating and their *destination* have varied.9 These in turn are influenced by the *policies* (if any) governing emigration prevalent during those periods. That is, time, magnitude, direction and policy are key variables in the analysis of the Indian diaspora. They are relevant, nay indispensable, in understanding specific aspects of the Indian diaspora (see Levin 1989; Zachariah et al. 2003). They also form a focal theme for a more specialized study, which may be called the *Demography of Indian Diaspora*.

A significant demographic aspect of the Indian diaspora which needs detailed analysis is the sex-ratio imbalance. The emigration of Indians, in the first instance, has generally been a male phenomenon (see Gulati 1993). This problem was grave in the case of indentured emigration during the colonial era. The acute shortage of women had both short-term and long-term consequences. With reference to the post-colonial emigration too, and especially for the labour emigration to West Asia, the predominance of males is noticeable. The implications of this and the balancing mechanisms at work are important facets for socio-demographic investigation.

The gender question relative to the Indian diaspora has begun to attract attention now. The primacy of gender as a signifier in the construction of community (Mohammed 1994; Reddock 1994, 1995), negotiating identities by women (Mascarenhas-Keyes 1993; Mohammed 2002a, 2002b; Ponyting 1990; Rayaprol 1997), Hindu women's response to reproductive technologies in a multicultural context (Dhruvarajan 1994), domestic violence (Abraham 2005) and the predicament of women as transnational migrants (Bal 2003; Bhattacharjee 1992; Dasgupta 1998; Gulati 2006; Kang 2003; Mand 2005; Percot 2006; Puwar and Raghuram 2003; Sheel 2005; Spivak 1996) are some of the important themes covered. Since gender dimension is not uniformly covered with reference to all diasporic situations, there appears to be considerable scope for replication and comparative analysis.

In both in the colonial and the post-colonial phases of the Indian diaspora, some emigrants returned home for various reasons. This is termed as *reverse migration*. While in the normal course the returnees are individuals and families (see Carter 1995; Nair 1991) under extraordinary circumstances reverse migration may assume massive proportions: the return of Indians from Burma (now Myanmar) on the eve of the Japanese invasion of that country during World War II and from Kuwait during the Gulf War (see Government of Kerala 1997; Jain 1991a, 1991b) are cases in point. Reverse migration is one of the least studied aspects of the Indian diaspora (see Ramji 2006; Zachariah Kannan and Rajan 2002: Ch. 4).

#### *Causes of and Conditions for Migration*

The decision of an individual or a group of people to leave the homeland in the first instance, and then to settle down in an alien land is influenced by various reasons, which may be broadly categorized as *the push factors* and *the pull factors*. Given these factors, which may operate in combination, the prevalent conditions determine the actual migration. Among these are the presence of an agency facilitating emigration, the policy framework governing movement of population both in the homeland and in the recipient country, convenient and economical mode of transportation, etc.

An analysis of the factors responsible for emigration is important as they determine whether a given stream of emigration was *voluntary* (that is, by choice) or *involuntary* (that is, due to necessity). Such an analysis will also clarify if a given mass emigration had functioned as a safety valve for some regions of the country or some sections of its population during particular periods in history, due to the prevalent economic, political, or social conditions.

A study of the factors responsible for emigration could also provide a benchmark for comparing diasporic communities with their 'remembered past' (see Barrier and Dusenbery 1989). In fact, for a better understanding of some communities of Indian origin in Africa, Asia, and the Caribbean it would be necessary to reconstruct the late eighteenth-century and early nineteenth-century rural socio-economic set-up in parts of India. Such an exercise has often been undertaken to delineate the factors influencing the emigration of Indians during the colonial period, especially under the indentured system (see Tinker 1993: 39–60; Vertovec 1992b: 6–12).

# *The Background of Emigrants*

Historically, emigrants from India have been a heterogeneous lot. They are varied in terms of their regional, religious, caste, occupational, linguistic, and cultural backgrounds. As crucial independent variables, data on these factors is indispensable for explaining the differential evolution of Indian communities abroad in general and the differences noticeable among sections of a given diasporic community in particular. A knowledge of the background of emigrants in conjunction with the demography of population movements is also crucial for interpreting the dynamics of social institutions and socio cultural patterns (see the sections on the social organization and the cultural dynamics of the diaspora community) of Indian communities abroad (see Adhopia 1993; Allen 1991; Biao 2001; Judge 2003a).

# *The Process of Emigration*

The process of emigration, especially if it is on a large scale (as in the colonial era) or of a particular category of labour force (as, for example, computer specialists, trained nurses, schoolteachers), involves agencies and mechanisms of emigration. The emigration may be officially sponsored, as the indentured labour immigration, or it may be channelled by private entrepreneurs, or informally sponsored by relatives and friends. The entire gamut of recruitment, agency, and the modalities employed by the emigrants is a significant aspect in the study of *Indian Diaspora*. The works of Ron Ramdin (1994) on Indian emigration to Trinidad, and of S.S. Jagpal (1994), T.S. Bains and H. Johnston (1995), and Archana Verma (2002), on Indian migration to Canada are insightful.

# *The Changing Composition of the 'Host' Country*

The plight of Indians as diasporic communities abroad is, to a considerable extent, determined by the ethnic, religious, and socio-economic composition of the 'host' country. Such countries are often described as plural societies. The concept of *plural society* is more than a descriptive label, and it rests on certain assumptions about which scholars are not in agreement. In fact, notwithstanding its uses, as a theoretical perspective in the analysis of diasporic situations it is fraught with controversies (see Baber 1987). As a descriptive label, 'multicultural society' appears to be more appropriate.

In discussions on the relationship of the Indian community with others in multicultural polities, one often comes across the phrase 'host society'. Since Indians are an emigrant (and thereby a 'guest') community in such alien (and thereby 'host') polities, the expression 'host society' seems apparently acceptable. However, a closer review of these societies/polities would reveal that in certain cases, the expression could be misleading. With the native population having been almost annihilated, as in Trinidad, the so-called 'host society' may consist of only emigrant communities with varying lengths of diasporic history.10 Thus, a knowledge of the changing composition of the country in which the Indians have emerged as a diasporic community is a sine qua non for a proper understanding of the latter.

#### *Dynamics of the 'Host' Society*

It is obvious from the foregoing that Indians as a diasporic community cannot be understood sui generis. The evolution of an Indian community abroad is closely linked to the general history of the host country. The economic, political, and social changes taking place there have an impact on the Indians as a diasporic community (see Ba'Nikongo 1994; Prakash C. Jain 1989b). Accordingly, the dynamics of the 'host' society becomes an integral part of a study of *Indian Diaspora*, providing, as it were, the backdrop against which the evolution and predicament of a diasporic community can be understood.

#### *Social Organization of the Diasporic Community*

Crucial to the evolution of Indians as a diasporic community has been their ability to adapt in an alien setting the institutions characteristic of the social organization of their ancestral land. The most important of these have been family, the rites (marriage) for establishing it, and the network of relationships (kinship) resulting from or reinforced by it. The caste system, which had been the primordial principle of social organization in the homeland, was another such institution. At a much broader level was the panchayat, the council of village elders, which arbitrated in community disputes and regulated community life.

In some diasporic situations, during the colonial phase (for example, in the Caribbean, Mauritius, and Fiji), the conditions were not conducive to the continuation of the traditional institutions. These institutions and the associated social practices even got de-institutionalized. With the settlement of Indians as a community, however, the traditional institutions were reconstituted with varying degrees of effectiveness. The caste system almost disappeared in the diasporic communities of the colonial period. Even in communities where the semblances of its elements are noticeable, it is neither a 'structural principle' nor is it 'functionally relevant' (Jayaram 2006). However, it must be pointed out that caste in the post-Independence diasporic communities has not received sufficient academic attention. Reference may be made here to the concept of 'dalit diaspora' (Vivek Kumar 2004) and Paramjit S. Judge's (2002, 2003b) work on the Punjabi scheduled castes in England.

Similarly, though one comes across references to the panchayat during the early stages of community formation, as in Trinidad, it is no longer to be found. Family is one institution which was effectively reconstituted, though even this was adapted to the local socio-economic conditions. Thus, the organization of Indians as a diasporic community bears the stamp of the dynamics of 'host' society, as mentioned earlier.

Social institutions of the Indian communities abroad have attracted and continue to attract the attention of anthropologists and sociologists studying the Indian diaspora (see Afroz 2000; Bacon 1996; Gallo 2005; Sheel 2005). Generally, studies on social institutions have been descriptive in nature, often comparing those institutions with their counterparts in India. Such a comparison carries the risk of confusing 'difference' for 'change'. Any analysis of change is necessarily diachronic and requires a point of departure in time. It is such a point of departure that is contemplated in the earlier discussion on the causes and condition for migration. Viewed in a diachronic perspective, analyses of social institutions in the Indian diaspora have immense potential for theoretical advancement, as they can explain the 'essentiality' of an institution, and its rootedness or otherwise in the Indian (Hindu, Muslim, or Sikh) culture.

#### *Cultural Dynamics of the Diasporic Community*

Akin to the social organization of the Indian communities abroad is the question about the socio-cultural baggage carried by the first generation emigrants from India. This baggage consisted of religion, language, music, art, dress, cuisine, etc. often in the folk form but in their regional variants. The experience of these cultural elements in different diasporic situations has been varied: some of these elements have disappeared; some have survived or persisted; others have experienced assimilation, syncretism or change; and a few elements have been sought to be revived (see Baumann 1995, 1998; Bhachu 2003; Bradby 1997; Collins 1997; Coney 2000; Diesel and Maxwell 1993; Dudrah 2002a, 2002b; Prakash C. Jain 2003; Jayaram 2000, 2003; Lutgendorf 2001; Mankekar 2005; Munasinghe 2001; Parekh et al. 2003; Sanjoy Roy 1997; Vertovec 1994). In a few cases, new cultural forms have been created (see Shukla 2005); the Muneeswaran worship in contemporary Singapore (see Sinha 2005) is an interesting case in point. Food as an area of culture has attracted special attention (Basu 2002; Mahabir 1992; Panayi 2002; Parama Roy 2002; Vallely 2004).

The relative dynamics of the cultural elements in diaspora is an instructive field of investigation. The conditions of persistence, assimilation, change, and revival, the relative ability of a particular element to adapt itself to new and changing conditions, and the sequences of changes in cultural elements are some key aspects that could be covered in such an investigation. Concepts such as 'sandwich culture' (Atal 1989), 'hybrid culture' (Shukla 2005: 17–18), 'cultural hybridity' (Shalini Puri 2004) and 'politics of cultural renaissance' (Jayaram 2003) have been advanced to capture the phenomenon.

#### *The Question of Identity*

In many diasporic situations, especially in multi-ethnic polities where the people of Indian origin are numerically significant, the question of their image and identity has been critical (see Axel 2002; Burdsey 2006; Gautam 1999; Kibria 1998; Pluss 2005). In the colonial phase, the British stereotyped Indian emigrants as 'coolies'. Even when upwardly mobile Indians became professionals, the prefix 'coolie' was always attached to their professional designation: In South Africa, Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi was often called 'the coolie lawyer'. Similarly, the traders of the East African coastline were called 'passenger Indians': 'The meaning was that they came to Africa on their own initiative as passengers paying their own fares; and yet, the nickname seemed to have an implication that they were travellers, sojourners, not settlers or immigrants' (Tinker 1977: 3). In the literature on the subject we are some references to such expressions as 'East Indians', 'Girmitiyas', 'the Asians', and the prefix 'Indo' being attached to Indians forming nationality groups in a country (for example, there are such hyphenated expressions as 'Indo-Americans', 'Indo-Canadians', 'Indo-Guyanese', and 'Indo-Trinidadians').

Many expressions describing diasporic Indians are local coinages, either by the Indian community itself or by its significant others, while some are labels coined by scholars studying them. Underlying these images and expressions is the process of mutual perception by the diasporic Indian community on the one hand, and its significant others on the other (see Jayaram 1998a). Based on case histories, Sathi S. Dasgupta (1989) provides an excellent account of identity formation among Indians in America (see also Dave et al. 2000; Rayaprol 2001). The question of identity ('self-image' and 'other-image') is thus an integral part of the study of *Indian Diaspora*.

Intrinsically related to the question of identity are the behaviour patterns designated by the term ethnicity. The evolution of ethnicity among diasporic Indians in relation to their significant others in multi-ethnic polities and the dynamics of ethnic relations are other areas falling under the study of *Indian Diaspora* (see Anthias 1998; Ballard 1994c; Burdsey 2006; van der Veer 1995; Williams 1991; Yelvington 1990). The transition 'from immigrant to diaspora' (Shukla 2005: 10) and the development of 'transnationalism'11 are neglected facets in the study of *Indian Diaspora.*

With reference to countries where the ethnic relations involving Indians have become complicated, Tinker (1977: 138–39) raises the following key questions:

. . . do the Asians [Indians] create their own difficulties by their own way of life, and by remaining separate from the host society; or do their troubles arise mainly from excess of chauvinism or racism in the country of their adoption? Do they offend because they are, visibly, both pariahs and exploiters in alien societies? Or are they scapegoats, singled out for victimisation because their adopted country (or its Government) needs an alibi for poor performance in the national sphere?

Expressions of ethnic identity and articulations of ethnic interests could be seen in the associations and forums formed by Indians in the diaspora. The nature and orientation of such associations in the Indian communities that have been in existence abroad for over a century are different from those in communities that have come into existence in the last few decades. The formation of associations on regional, linguistic, and caste lines is generally peculiar to the latter. The structure and functioning of ethnic Indian associations abroad and the transnational networks among the diasporic Indians deserve greater scholarly attention (see Bacon 1996: 22–58; Bhat 1993; Rajagopal 1997). Moreover, Ananda Mitra (1997: 76–77) has argued that electronic communication systems offer an opportunity to the diasporic communities to produce new identities and that they are using different means to achieve this (see also A.S. Rai 1995; Vertovec 2004).

# *The Struggle for Power*

In polities where Indians have been numerically significant, their ethnic orientation has been tied to the struggle for political power (see Ryan 1996). That is, the issue of ethnicity has manifested a tendency to get politicized. Governmental policies and actions are perceived and reacted to in ethnic terms (see Sudama 1993). In some countries, the struggle for political power has crossed the bounds of democracy and has even led to violent conflicts and the suppression of the Indian community. The predicament of Indo-Fijians is a case in point (see Brown 1989; Shubha Singh 2001; Voigt-Graf 2001). This has also resulted in the exodus of the Indian community, as with the Indo-Guyanese emigrating to North America, the Hindustani Surinamese emigrating to The Netherlands, the East African Sikhs emigrating to the United Kingdom, and the Indo-Fijians emigrating to New Zealand and Canada. The political predicament of the Indian communities abroad and their involvement in the struggle for political power form a distinct focus of the study of *Indian Diaspora*.

# *The Secondary Emigration*

Besides political upheavals and oppressions in their country of adoption, the diasporic Indians have moved out of their country of first settlement in search of greener pastures (see Bedford 1989; Gosine 1990a, 1992; van der Burg 1993). Some of them, though rarely, and mostly as individuals, have even experienced subsequent emigration. While the 'twice-removed' Indians (Bhachu 1991) were initially treated as refugees, they have now established themselves as diasporic communities in their second land of adoption. In some cases, as in the United Kingdom and Canada, these 'second' diasporic communities have to negotiate with the Indian diasporic communities already existing there (ibid.). Thus, the phenomenon of the second and subsequent diaspora throws up new facets for research.

## *Orientation of the Diasporic Indians to the Ancestral Land*

As William Safran has observed, it is a general characteristic of diasporics that 'they continue to relate, personally or vicariously, to the homeland in one way or another, and their ethno-communal consciousness and solidarity are importantly defined by the existence of such a relationship' (1991: 84). Thus, the diasporic Indians do not sever their relationship with their ancestral land; in some cases, there is now a search for continuity and 'ancestral impulse' (Parmasad 1994), an effort to 'solve' their roots (see Deen 1994). The nature of this relationship is highly variant in different diasporic situations: with a mental relationship with 'imagined India' at one extreme, to periodical visits to India at the other extreme. The image that the diasporic Indians have of India, what that image means to them, and what is the relationship between the diasporic Indians and Indians, are some topics for investigation in the study of *Indian Diaspora* (see Jayaram 1998a; see also Ravindra K. Jain 1997, 1998a; Vertovec 1997).

In this context, it must be observed that globalization and the rapid advancements in the electronic media, and particularly the computer mediated communication technologies, have created, what Arjun Appadurai calls, 'diasporic public spheres' (1997: 4). The diasporic people, Indians included, are 'increasingly using these technologies to re-create a sense of virtual community through a rediscovery of their commonality' (Mitra 1997: 58), and engage in what Ivind Fuglerud and Oivind Fuglerud (1999) call 'long-distance nationalism' and add new dimension to what Stephen Castles and Alastair Davidson (2000) call 'the politics of belonging'. This phenomenon opens up fascinating possibilities for the study of the Indian diaspora (see Ravindra K. Jain 1998b; Kanjilal 2004; Vinay Lal 1999).

An important manifestation of the continued contact that the diasporic people maintain with their ancestral land is the remittances that they make home periodically and the investments that NRIs (Non-Resident Indians) make in India. While these remittances are welcome considering the precious foreign exchange that they bring into the country, they also have a significant socio-economic impact on the families and areas from which the immigrants hail (see Amjad 1989; Ballard 2004; Gordon and Gupta 2004; Issac 1997; Kannan and Hari 2002; Lall 2001; Nair 1994; Nayyar 1994; Prakash 1998; Rajan 2004; Walton-Roberts 2004; Zachariah et al. 2001).

However, the orientation of the Indian diasporic community to the ancestral country need not always be positive. For example, in the context of the Punjab imbroglio of the 1980s, the Sikh diaspora witnessed an organized anti-Indian stance necessitating contestation on the community's 'national' identity (see Brah 1996; Dusenbery 1995). Some analysts of the Sikh diaspora have even viewed it as a case of 'victim diaspora' (see Tatla 1999). Thus, the orientation of the diasporic community to the ancestral land cannot be taken for granted; rather it needs to be problemetized and examined in its historical, cultural, and political contexts.

# *Orientation of the Ancestral Land to the Diasporic Indians*

Conversely, the orientation of the ancestral land to the diasporic Indians is also a significant but neglected subject of study in *Indian Diaspora*. This orientation can be approached from two different points of view: (i) the formal stand of the Government of India about the Indian communities abroad (see Government of India 2001; Lall 2001), as revealed by its policies and programmes; and (ii) the informal relationships that exist between Indians and their relatives and friends in the diaspora (see Kalpagam 2005). There is very little documentation on the informal relations between the diasporic Indians and their ancestral land. As regards the formal stand of the Government of India, there appears to be an erroneous tendency to view the Indian diaspora as a homogeneous category, and to mistakenly identify the PIO (Persons of Indian Origin) for the so-called *Pravasi Bharatiyas* (the Indian diaspora). While the report of the High Level Committee on Indian Diaspora, appointed by the Government of India, apparently recognizes this fact, there is very little in its policy recommendations to address the nuances of a heterogeneous diaspora (see Government of India 2001). After all, it is only the PIO that is viewed as a 'strategic asset' (Kapur 2003).

## *Impact of Emigrants on the Local Society in the Ancestral Land*

The emigration of Indians, especially the PIO and NRI,12 has impacted on the local society in their ancestral land. The impact of remittances on the local economy and of the male migration on the family have been researched (see Furtado 1999; Gulati 1993; Prakash 1998; Sekhar 1996); the feasibility of utilizing foreign remittances for the development of a state's internal economy has been questioned with reference to the Kerala model (see Mathew 2004).

However, there is very little known about the family dynamics of these diasporics. It is well known that in small-sized middle-class families of urban areas, the diasporics have been catalysts in the emigration of other family members and relatives, with the elderly remaining behind in India. In cities like Bangalore, Hyderabad, and Pune the elderly parents of such diasporics have even formed networks and associations. Furthermore, some diasporics have returned to their ancestral communities and have been engaged in developmental activities. There is also the issue of brain drain (see Atal and Dall'Oglio 1987; Khadria 1999a). These and other related aspects deserve detailed investigation.

#### *Other Themes*

Some diasporic communities have received scant attention and they need to be studied as they are characterized by special features: the Anglo-Indians who emigrated to Australia are one such case. The Indian Jewish emigrants (the Bene Israelis of Maharashtra, the Cochini Jews, and the Baghdadi Jews) who answered the call of the founders of Israel for an 'ingathering of Jews' from all over the world are another case (see Das 1996). Similar cases include the Indians in Myanmar, Thailand, Singapore, and other South and East Asian countries.

There have been some diasporic communities in India; for example, the Chinese and Armenians in Kolkata, the Tibetans in Dharmashala and Karnataka, the Jews (see Katz 2000; Katz and Goldberg 1993; Roland 1989), and the Africans. The evolution of these communities in India and their integration with its mainstream society need to be studied. Studies on these communities will also provide insights into the nature of India as a 'host' society.

# **Approaches to the Study of** *Indian Diaspora*

The specific topics falling within the purview of the foregoing broad themes have been approached from the perspective of different disciplines. Given the complex nature of *Indian Diaspora* as an area of academic study, the scholars have been required to cross the boundaries of their respective disciplines. Tapping data on a particular topic, using concepts for interpreting data on hand, and the use of theoretical and methodological perspectives to enlarge the scope of generalization and to join debates at a broader level are some transdisciplinary strategies adopted by scholars. A few scholars have even been explicitly interdisciplinary in their orientation.

Emphasizing chronology, the historical approach yields accounts of the phases of emigration and the early life situations of the Indian emigrants in the 'host' countries (see Tinker 1993). Anthropological and sociological approaches have largely shared a common platform: using the conventional research techniques and theoretical frameworks of their disciplines, these approaches yield rich ethnographic accounts of the Indian communities abroad and analyse the dynamics of social institutions and socio cultural elements in those communities (see Williams 1991). There have been instances of geographers combining the techniques of, and the insights from, these disciplines. Political scientists have followed suit, especially in their analysis of the interface between ethnicity and politics in multi-ethnic societies where the Indian community is a key constituent (see Premdas 1995a, 1995b).

Besides historians, anthropologists, sociologists, geographers, and political scientists, scholars working in the fields of languages, linguistics, and literature (see Birbalsingh 1989; Damsteegt 2002; Gregg 2002; Mesthrie 1991; Paranjape 2001; Purushotam 1998; Radhakrishnan 1996; Scaria and Johnson 2004; Srikanth 2004; van der Avoird 2001; Mahendra K. Verma 1991), cinema (Dudrah 2006), and international relations (see Dubey 2003; Mathews 2003) have also shown interest in the Indian diaspora. Their interest, however, is more restricted though they too use the work of scholars from other fields. Based on their experience, a few diplomats have reported on the position and problems of Indian communities in some countries (see Hiremath 1992–93). There have also been analyses of policies and laws governing immigration in some countries. The High Level Committee on Indian Diaspora, appointed by the Government of India, has produced an extensive report (see Government of India 2001).

Of a different genre are works expressing voices from the Indian diaspora (Akhil 2005; Benjamin et al., 1998; Birbalsingh 2000; Butlin 1997; Carter 1996; Vikram Chandra 1990; Dabydeen 2000; De Verteuil 1989; Dhondy 1991; Essop 1990; Fluderlink 2003; Ghosh 2002; Ghosh-Schellhorn 2006; Khoyratty 2005; Amita Kumar 2002; Kunzru 2004; Jhumpa Lahiri 2003; Nelson 1992; Rushdie 1991). Although falling under literature, these works offer rare and valuable insights into the dynamics of Indian diaspora.

Largely, studies on Indian diaspora have been country-specific. Some scholars have enlarged their coverage by focusing on a specific issue or topic of Indian diaspora in a given region. This is understandable considering the constraints of opportunity, time, and resources encountered by scholars. Thus, comparative studies of Indian diaspora have been few (see Eriksen 1992; Ravindra K. Jain 1989; Look Lai 1993, Shukla 2005; Vertovec 1994). Restudies of a diasporic community (see Ravindra K. Jain 2003; Klass 1991) and comparisons between 'the old immigration' and 'the new immigration' (see Helweg 1991; Ravindra K. Jain 2004) are rare.

Whatever the disciplinary orientations from which the study of Indian diaspora is approached, broadly two theoretical frameworks have been adopted in its analysis: *the sociocultural perspective* and *the political economy perspective* (see S.L. Sharma 1989). Focussing on cultural identity and integration of the diasporic communities, the socio-cultural perspective has largely operated from within the parameters of conventional structural-functionalism. It addresses the questions of sociocultural continuity and change among the diasporic communities on the one hand, and the dynamics of these communities in the context of multiculturalism on the other.

Drawing insights from a variety of Marxist and non-Marxist socio-economic thinking, the political economy perspective focuses on the economic and political aspects of the phenomenon of Indian diaspora. This perspective emphasizes the historical context of the diaspora, the mode of economy of the 'host' country and the place of the diasporic Indians in it, and the nature of the state in the 'host' country. While these two theoretical perspectives are different, both in their substantive interests and in their conceptual apparatus, they can only be complementary to each other in providing a more comprehensive understanding of the Indian diaspora.

#### Indian diaspora *in the University Curriculum*

Notwithstanding its growing popularity as a subject of transdisciplinary research, *Indian Diaspora* is yet to be established as an integral part of university curriculum. As noted earlier, the Model Curriculum in Sociology, circulated by the UGC in 2001, recommended 'The Study of *Indian Diaspora*' as an elective course (E 13). The Department of Sociology at the University of Hyderabad has introduced *Indian Diaspora* as an elective course. This has been an obvious outcome of the location of the Centre for the Study of Indian Diaspora in that Department. The Department of Sociology at Goa University too has included it as an elective course, as have a few centres at the School of International Studies, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi. In many departments of English, the Indian diaspora has entered as an element in the study of English and European literature.

Wherever *Indian Diaspora* is offered as part of the academic curriculum, the tendency is to infuse a disciplinary orientation to its teaching. This is despite the subject being intrinsically transdisciplinary in nature. Thus, if in a sociology department the approach is predominantly sociological and anthropological, in a history department it is invariably historical. The subject takes an almost exclusively international relations perspective when it is taught in a department of international studies. In English departments, the orientation is that of cultural studies or of literary criticism.

As regards the prospects of *Indian Diaspora* becoming an integral part of university curriculum, the indications are mixed. In the departments or centres of international relations and English, the subject appears to have better prospects, as compared with the departments of sociology or history. As far as sociology departments are concerned, the teaching of *Indian Diaspora* appears to be contingent upon the availability of both faculty with exposure to the study of the Indian diaspora and the study materials. For instance, in Goa University, the teaching of this subject was discontinued once the teacher with expertise in *Indian Diaspora*  left the services of the university. Thus, for some more time to come, *Indian Diaspora* will primarily remain a subject of research interest, rather than a taught course.

# **Conclusion**

The study of Indian communities abroad over the last half century has driven home the point that the 'Indian diaspora' is a heterogeneous and complex phenomenon, subsuming under it many phases, patterns, and processes. There is yet a long way to go before one can confidently theorize the Indian diaspora. What is important is to unravel as many aspects of it as many perspectives as possible, so that in the due course there will be sufficient building blocks of data and conclusions upon which to build a theory. Until then, one will have to make good with the existing theoretical perspectives of anthropology, history, and sociology (see Sudesh Mishra 2006).

#### 414 n. Jayaram

Obviously, one cannot deal with the Indian diaspora using by the conceptual apparatus and analytical tools of any one conventional social science, be it anthropology, history, or sociology. Lest it turns out to be the proverbial elephant and the four blind men, the study of the Indian diaspora has to be truly transdisciplinary, where scholars, methodologies and ideas cross their disciplinary boundaries. In other words, the study of the Indian diaspora has to follow the path already trodden by such fields as gender studies and cultural studies.

Questions are often asked about the theoretical significance and policy implications of the study of *Indian Diaspora*. Societies with large or significant sections of immigrant populations are social laboratories where the salient theoretical perspectives of social science disciplines can be tested. Diasporic situations enable one to trace and analyse certain key social processes like the formation of ethnic identity, the shaping of ethnic relations, the reconstitution of institutions, the reconstruction of life-worlds, etc. Since diasporic situations require interaction of cultures, they provide unique avenues for understanding the dynamics of culture (see Braziel and Mannur 2003).

Turning to the policy implications, an appreciation of the heterogeneous nature of the Indian diaspora and the asymmetrical orientations of India and her diaspora towards each other rules out any uniform policy by the Government of India towards the so-called *Pravasi Bharatiyas*. A realistic policy must take into account the differential interests and expectations of the heterogeneous diaspora and differentially address the issues of the different diasporic Indian communities, instead of mistaking the PIO for the Indian diaspora (see Lall 2001). The uncritical use of the phrase 'the Indian diaspora' has, it seems, unwittingly hindered the possibility of a realistic policy towards Indian communities abroad.

# notes

- 1. For analytical clarity, I have italicized the designation *Indian Diaspora* to distinguish it as an area of academic study from its substantive focus, namely, the sociocultural phenomenon of the Indian diaspora.
- 2. For a country-wise estimation of the size of the overseas Indian community, see Government of India (2001: xlvii–l).
- 3. Two more such centres have been established in recent years, though more circumscribed in their scope than the Hyderabad centre. The Centre for Indian Diaspora and Cultural Studies at the Hemachandracharya North Gujarat University, Patan, largely deals with diaspora literature. The Centre for the Study of Punjabi Diaspora at the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, focusses on the study of, as its name suggests, Punjabi diaspora.
- 4. In Fiji, this contractual system was called *girmit* (the Hindi-ized version of 'agreement'), and the labourer entering such a contract was called a *girmitia*.