# **5 The Great Debate**

## What was NEP?

In the previous chapter we have been giving an outline of the evolution of the economic system within the general pattern and assumptions of NEP. It is now necessary to pass from a description of an evolving situation to an analysis of the discussions of the twenties, which were of the very greatest political and economic importance. They have a significance far beyond the period and location in which they took place. Many developing countries today face similar problems: the financing of capital accumulation, the strategy of economic growth in industrialization, the role of the peasantry after land reform in the context of development, these problems have arisen in many places outside Russia. It may be said that they arose in Russia first, or rather that politicians and economists first became conscious of such problems in the Soviet Union. Far be it from me to suggest that the Stalin solution of such problems is a model for any developing country. Elsewhere the answers to the questions posed may be very different. It remains both interesting and important to study the thought patterns of politicians and economists in the Soviet Union in these years, when relatively frank discussion was still possible, and hard-hitting debates took place in academic and political circles. Although Stalin's political machine already controlled much of what was going on, it was still possible to conduct a genuine public debate on burning issues.

First of all, what exactly was the nature of NEP?

Lenin had left behind, in his articles and speeches, a number of interpretations which were by no means consistent. His successors, busily engaged in a political struggle and anxious to preserve the Bolshevik regime, all tried to present themselves as orthodox Leninists. So it would be proper to return in thought to 1921, to the end of Chapter 3. It was already shown there that Lenin had been thinking of 1794, of the need to avoid Robespierre's fate by timely retreat. He used the word 'retreat' repeatedly. In referring to war communism he used the parallel of Port Arthur, which had been unsuccessfully attacked by the Japanese at the beginning of the siege. They then withdrew, regrouped their forces and resumed their assault more methodically, succeeding in the end. The moral seemed to be that some unsuccessful attacks were a necessary pre-condition to a victorious advance, since otherwise the right road could not be found. On either of these two interpretations, NEP represented a forced and highly undesirable retreat, and logically the next step should be to regroup and to resume the advance in due course.

Yet at other times Lenin hotly denied that NEP was undesirable. He argued that, but for the necessities of war, it would have been possible to continue the much milder policies which were begun early in 1918. In still another mood, Lenin would point to the errors and stupidities of the war-communism period, to excessively sweeping nationalization, over-centralization, etc. However, on this view NEP could hardly be regarded as retreat at all. If the economic system of 1918—21 was either a forced reaction to an emergency situation or an error, then a return to the *status quo ante* June 1918 was a return to the correct road, and not a withdrawal in the face of the superior forces of the enemy.

What then was in Lenin's mind when NEP was fully established and fate removed from him the power of movement and coherent speech? Did he, as Bukharin believed, draw from the horrors and excesses of war communism a cautious, gradualist conclusion? NEP, he asserted, was intended 'seriously and for a long time'. How long is a long time? Lenin himself answered this question by hinting that twenty-five years would be a rather pessimistic view.<sup>1</sup> Lenin and all his comrades must have believed that the advance would be resumed, otherwise they had no *raison d'etre* as Bolsheviks at all. They were bound to regard the ultimate achievement of socialism as the one possible justification for their being in power. But when was the advance to be resumed? At what speed? In what direction? Above all, what was to be done to convert or transform the peasant majority of **the**  population, and how was the industrialization of Russia to be pursued after the period of reconstruction had come to an end? Questions such as these interacted with political issues, concerned with the power position of individuals and factions and the succession to Lenin.

In disentangling the various strands of the argument it is important to distinguish between a number of aspects of a highly complex situation. There was first and foremost the basic dilemma of a Bolshevik revolution, triumphant in the name of Marxism and the dictatorship of the proletariat in an overwhelmingly peasant country. The party had power, the pre-revolutionary productive capacity had been, or was being, restored. By 1925-6 the party had to face a vast question of political economy: how to transform the entire social-economic situation by deliberate action from above. If this was to be done by planning, then by what kind, enforced by what mechanism? A large increase in savings, in accumulation of capital, would be necessary. Who was to **bear**  the sacrifices, and how severe would these sacrifices be? In debates in Russia under Gorbachev the point was repeatedly made, notably by Yu. Afanasyev, Gefter and Tsipko,<sup>2</sup> that Bolshevism and NEP were inherently incompatible, that both ideological and practical-economic considerations would speedily drive the leadership into a collision course with the essential features of a mixed market-orientated economy. Such a view has much to commend it.

Another aspect of the problem concerned national security. Of course Lenin and Stalin were not the first to see the intimate relationship between industrial development and military potential. Witte, thirty years earlier, had known all about this and had been greatly influenced by such considerations. However, the isolation of the Bolshevik revolution, alone in a world dominated by 'imperialist' powers, lent a special urgency to the situation, as this was seen by the leadership. The extent and the vigour of intervention during the civil war were exaggerated, but the fact that intervention had occurred strengthened the predisposition to believe that another series of 'imperialist' conspiracies would soon

challenge **the** security of **the** Soviet state. In **the** middle twenties **the** Western powers were quiescent, but the recurrent alarms about **the** plots of 'Chamberlain and Poincare' were only partly a matter of deliberate invention for political reasons. The fears seem to have been genuine. The breaking-off of diplomatic relations by Britain in 1927 lent some substance to these fears. There was also nervousness about the Japanese in the Far East. The importance of these attitudes in the present context lay in their impact on the speed of industrialization and on its direction and pattern. The higher the projected rate of growth, the greater the savings and sacrifices. Equally clearly, the more weight that "was given to national security considerations, the more the priority afforded to military might and economic independence. This meant more attention to heavy industry, to steel, coal, machinery, at the expense of consumers' goods. But this meant even more sacrifices, which had one further consequence which proved to be of the very greatest significance. If the emphasis in investment was to be on heavy industry, then the peasants could not be offered material incentives sufficient to persuade them to sell more produce. This in turn severely limited the power of manoeuvre of an industrializing Soviet government, within the context of the agricultural settlement bequeathed by the revolution.

#### The Peasants and Accumulation

There has already been some discussion in the previous chapter of the consequences of the land settlement of 1917-18. Agricultural production recovered fairly rapidly, but there was a persistent shortage in marketed produce, and the towns could only be fed at the cost of a drastic reduction in exports of grain. Yet urbanization called for a substantial increase in off-farm consumption of food and also for a large export surplus to pay for essential imports of capital goods. Could this problem be resolved within the traditional peasant methods of production, the three-field system, strips, tiny holdings? Was this not a bottleneck which would hold back the entire economic development of Russia? NEP was based on the so-called smychka with the peasants, the word implying a link, cooperation, harmony. Yet Lenin knew and said that a market-orientated private peasantry generated capitalism. It is true that Lenin, in his last year of political life, also said that the peasants had to be shown the advantages of socialism and cooperation, that they should not be coerced. This presented his successors with a very complex question. It was from the betteroff peasants that marketable surpluses would come. Any peasant who specialized in providing marketable surpluses would increase his income. Would this be a dangerous growth of potentially or actually capitalistic elements? What alternative was there, without being in breach of both the assumptions of NEP and of the principles of the smychka? Bukharin, who had been a leader of the left wing during the war-communism period, became the best known of the leaders of the moderates (the future 'right-wing deviation') in the twenties. He reasoned as follows: NEP is to be persisted with for a long time, for a generation at least. It is out of the question to use force against the peasants. While support for the poor peasants may be politically preferable from the Bolshevik point of view, it is" from the middle and better-off peasants that the needed farm surpluses will come, and in no circumstances must they be antagonized. On the contrary, they must be encouraged. The alternative policy would bring back the black days of confiscations, and gravely endanger the Bolshevik hold on political power, since it would lead to peasant rebellion. Bukharin was in favour of building socialism, but only at a pace which the individual peasant producers could be persuaded to accept. In his view, greater prosperity among the peasants, more commercial production, was not only essential but was also not dangerous. In the process of time these peasants too would 'grow into socialism'. Following his own logic, he launched in April 1925 the slogan 'Get rich'. The Russian word for this, *obogaschaites,* was the exact translation of a slogan coined in the 1840s by Guizot, the minister of Louis Philippe of France: *enrichissezvous.* 

Parallels with French revolutionary history were never far from the minds of Bolshevik intellectuals. Guizot was a bourgeois statesman *par excellence.* The slogan was too much. While at this period Stalin was in political alliance with Bukharin, and favoured

tax concessions to the more prosperous peasants, which were in fact accorded in 1925, he never committed himself as far as did Bukharin to the logic of his peasant policy. He declared to the fourteenth party conference in the same month: 'The slogan "get rich" is not our slogan.' Bukharin was forced to withdraw the offending words and to admit that kulaks were an evil to be limited and squeezed. Indeed by 1927 he spoke of 'a strong offensive against the kulak'.

However, this retreat from the logic of his policy made Bukharin's entire position untenable. A kulak is a prosperous peasant. A middle peasant is a less prosperous peasant. The official line in 1925-7 accepted the middle peasant as the indispensable provider of farm surpluses, while making political gestures towards the poor peasant (there were bitter complaints that the poor peasants' interests were in fact neglected). But this meant that any middle peasant who was successful in developing commercial sales, who sought to expand his holding by leasing or his production by employing a couple of labourers, would speedily convert himself into a kulak. Agriculture had to succeed, and yet it could not be allowed to succeed on the basis of a prosperous private peasant. This was not a sensible or logical policy. Yet what was the alternative?

This kind of dilemma has been faced in other developing countries. There is a tendency for the same people to demand both land reform and industrialization. Yet land reform often has the effect, at least in the short term, of reducing the volume of marketable production, and sometimes of total production, because an egalitarian land redistribution strengthens the traditional subsistence sector. The problem can in principle be resolved by the emergence of a commercially minded peasant minority, though no one who knows anything about agricultural problems in developing countries would fall into the error of supposing that there is an easy solution. In the special case of the Soviet Union under Bolshevik rule, an advance in this direction came up against an ideological/political barrier.

The logic of the Bukharin approach necessarily involved an emphasis on the production (or importation) of goods the peasants wanted. The same logic called for relatively slow growth, since progress would be limited by the peasants' willingness to save and to supply the state with food surpluses. Bukharin himself spoke of 'riding into socialism on a peasant nag'. But could the peasant nag be persuaded to go in the right direction? Would the party be able to control it? It must not be forgotten that Soviet power in the villages was weak, and that traditional peasant communal institutions were in effective command; within them the more prosperous peasants tended to become dominant as natural village leaders and because so many of their poorer neighbours depended on them.

The so-called left opposition challenged the validity of Bukharin's policies. As might be expected, their arguments were deeply influenced not only by their views on the particular issues but also by the logic of factional struggle. It is this same logic which in the middle twenties led to a temporary alliance between Stalin and the Bukharin faction. Zinoviev and Kamenev in 1923 found it politic to support both Stalin and Bukharin in a struggle against the left opposition. In 1925, Zinoviev and Kamenev joined the Trotsky group, and thereupon saw virtues in the left opposition's case which had quite escaped their notice two years earlier. However, these and other policy zigzags should not cause us to suppose that the perplexing issues faced by all these men were unreal. Issues are often adopted by political men for their own purposes.

The most cogent theoretical statement of the opposition's case, and one which lights up most vividly the nature of the difficulties which faced the regime, came from the pen of Preobrazhensky. He had been a collaborator of Bukharin's in 1918, but unlike Bukharin he accepted NEP with many reservations and clearly wished to resume the offensive against the hated private sector at the earliest date. He therefore emphasized the dangers which the regime ran if it were to persist for long in the course set in 1921- 4. Already in 1923 he was quoting with approval the concept of 'primitive socialist accumulation', and his lectures on the subject in 1924 at the Communist Academy were later expanded and published as a book.<sup>3</sup>

Primitive (or initial) capitalist accumulation was described by Marx using British models. Capital was accumulated through the

expropriation of the peasantry, by the enclosures of agricultural land, colonial exploitation, the Highland clearances in Scotland. The resultant concentrations of capital came to be invested in industrial development. Applying this analysis to the situation of the USSR, Preobrazhensky pointed out that there were no colonies to exploit and the peasants could not be expropriated, and yet the necessary socialist accumulation had to come from somewhere. It would be necessary not only in order to finance industrialization, but also to expand the socialist sector of the economy at the expense of the private sector. Clearly the necessary resources could not arise wholly or even mainly within the socialist sector of the economy. Apart from the fact that it was too small to bear the burden by itself, it was wrong and politically dangerous that the sacrifices should be borne by the working class employed by nationalized industries. Resources would therefore have to be obtained from the private sector. The bulk of the private sector were the peasants. Preobrazhensky saw that the necessary capital would not be provided by voluntary savings. The better-off peasants were very unlikely to lend sufficient money to the government, and the Nepmen in the cities naturally used whatever capital they possessed to make hay while the sun shone, realistically fearing that it might not shine for long. Resources would doubtless have to be obtained by taxation, but most of all through unequal exchange, by 'exploitation' of the private sector. The state should use its position as the supplier of the bulk of industrial goods, and as the foreign trade monopolist, to pump resources out of the private sector and so finance the state's investments into the expanding socialist industrial sector. Preobrazhensky never failed to emphasize the importance of this conflict between socialist and capitalist elements, and he wrote of the struggle between 'the law of value' and the principle of primitive socialist accumulation, i.e. between the forces of the market and those of the socialist state expanding the socialist sectors.

Bukharin and other leaders of the party majority strongly counter-attacked. This doctrine, in their view, was threatening the alliance between workers and peasants. The word 'exploitation' and the principle of unequal exchange were severely criticized. After all, this was 1924, when the country was only just correcting the excessively unfavourable terms of trade for peasants which characterized the 'scissors' crisis of 1923 (see previous chapter). Every effort was still being made to compel a further relative reduction in the prices charged by state industry. Was this the time to speak of unequal exchange? It may well be that some reasoned privately thus: 'Of course we will have to exploit the peasants in due time, but for goodness' sake let us keep quiet about it now.'

Trotsky, Preobrazhensky and their followers developed two further criticisms. Firstly, they held that the official line had been too favourable to the better-off peasants. They spoke loudly of the kulak danger and envisaged the degeneration of the party into some sort of adjunct of the NEP bourgeoisie. (We shall see that this degeneration, such as it was, was of a very different kind, but this was not apparent to the opposition at the time.) The party majority was under continuous attack from the left for being soft on the kulaks. Secondly, the left opposition contended that the party's industrialization programme was too modest, that a major campaign to build up industry far beyond the levels of 1913 should be launched forthwith. Both Stalin and Bukharin argued at this time that higher growth rates and additional investments advocated by the left opposition represented an adventurist and unpractical policy, which would endanger hard-won financial stability and impose intolerable sacrifices. This would be inconsistent with the principles of NEP. It is true that the same Stalin was a few years later advocating tempos which were far more ambitious and ruthless than any which the opposition had proposed.

The entire controversy was linked with a famous debate on 'socialism in one country'. One must introduce a warning here. It might appear logical that the industrializers and 'primitive accumulationists' should favour this slogan, while the cautious Stalin—Bukharin gradualists would be against it. In fact the reverse was the case. Stalin and Bukharin said that they would build socialism in one country, even though Bukharin did say that the process would be long and slow. The left opposition, especially Zinoviev, cited Lenin to show that this was impossible

and unorthodox. The factional considerations which led to the arguments around this political slogan are outside the scope of this book. However, there is an economic point to be made which is relevant to an understanding of the logic of the left position. Preobrazhensky himself recognized, in one of the last articles in which he was allowed to express his own point of view, that under conditions of isolation Russia's problem was virtually insoluble as he envisaged it. He listed the many contradictions. He drew the conclusion that all this showed 'how closely our development towards socialism is connected with the necessity of making a breach in our socialist isolation; not only for political but also for economic reasons we must be aided in the future by the material resources of other socialist countries'.<sup>4</sup> Within the political-economic assumptions of NEP, it would indeed be impossible simultaneously to fight the kulaks, raise prices charged to peasants, increase \*off-farm surpluses, raise workers' wages and greatly to raise the levels of capital accumulation. Yet Preobrazhensky never faced up to the possibility of resolving the dilemmas through coercion, through expropriating the peasantry. A way would be provided by a revolution in more advanced Western countries, which would come to the aid of developing Russia and so mitigate the harshness of Russian industrialization. Therefore the argument of the left opposition over the slogan 'socialism in one country' to some extent reflected their disbelief in the practicability of any solution to the dilemmas of the twenties so long as the USSR remained isolated. This was politically a weak point in their arguments, and it is hardly surprising that Stalin and his colleagues attacked their alleged lack of faith in socialism and in Russia.

Of course the above represents only the roughest summary of arguments advanced. There were plenty of other points of disagreement and also plenty of other protagonists. Thus there was the People's Commissariat for Finance (Narkomfin) which was devoted above all to financial soundness. In their economic policies the Commissar, Sokol'nikov, and the head of the State Bank, Shanin, could be identified as on the extreme right, because of their insistence that any industrial project be sound and profitable. Yet Sokol'nikov was a political supporter of

Zinoviev, who had joined the left opposition. There is of course no inherent reason why one should not support a conservative investment policy, owing to consciousness of the acute shortage of capital, and at the same time inveigh against the dangers of kulaks in villages. The lines of controversy were by no means clear-cut. It must be emphasized also that the protagonists shared many common assumptions. All took for granted the necessity of the retention of sole political power by their party. All took for granted the necessity of industrialization and were under no illusions concerning the limitations of individual peasant agriculture. Peasant cooperation and collectivization were regarded by all as desirable aims. The difference lay in tempos, methods, the assessment of dangers, the strategy to be followed in pursuit of aims very largely held in common. Soviet historians were fond of contrasting the policies of the majority ('the party') with the negative, defeatist, anti-industrializing, pro-peasant policies of various oppositions. Such a picture is a most distorted one. The fourteenth congress of the party meeting in 1925, passed resolutions favouring industrialization, while the fifteenth congress (1927) declared in favour of collectivization and of the five-year plan. However, these resolutions were adopted with the support of the future right-wing opposition. Indeed the 'industrial plan' resolution in 1927 was introduced by Rykov, who was Bukharin's most influential supporter.

Trotsky's views have also become distorted, not least by those who purport to be Trotskyists. Until 1925, when he was expelled from the politbureau, he remained wholly within the assumptions of NEP. In his speech to the 12th party congress in 1923, and on other occasions, he accepted the need to encourage the private peasant producer. He was better able than his ally Preobrazhensky to see the necessity for the co-existence of plan and market, and perhaps this helps to explain why Preobrazhensky broke with Trotsky when, in 1928, Stalin turned 'left'.<sup>5</sup>

While believing, as they all did, in a future marketless socialism, Trotsky was eloquent about the need for a market in what he called 'the transitional epoch'. For example: 'For the next period we shall have a planned economy allying itself more and more with the market and, as a result, adapting itself to the market... The present selling crisis is a harsh warning the peasant market is giving xis .. . The correct work of our state planning commission . . . [is] not by suppressing the market but on the basis of the market' (and much more in the same vein), this from his *New Course,* published in 1923. As for his view of socialism in Russia, while opposed to the idea that socialism could be completely 'built' in one country, he accepted the need to be 'building' it (in Russian there is a grammatical distinction between *stroif -* the process of building, and *postroif,* the completed action).<sup>6</sup>

Does this mean that the argument was concerned only or mainly with who should wield political power? Such a conclusion would be totally misleading. The policy differences were deeply felt. It is true that Stalin later on stole many of the clothes of the left opposition, but Bukharin's entire vision of Soviet development differed radically from that which came to be adopted by Stalin, despite the fact that they shared some common aims. Bukharin wished to preserve NEP for a long time yet. Stalin destroyed it. The right opposition were horrified by Stalin's peasant policies and by his industrialization strategy, as well as by his political methods. There were deep and sincerely held policy differences.

### Some Original Economic Ideas

We have so far been emphasizing differences of opinion among professional politicians. But the debates and controversies of the twenties contain much more that is of interest for the economic historian, and perhaps most particularly for the historian of economic thought. Development economics could be said to have been born here.

It is not that the Soviet economists, planners and statesmen were more intelligent or imaginative than their Western contemporaries. It is just that the institutional and political circumstances posed problems in Russia which demanded consideration. Even at the height of NEP, the bulk of investment capital was in the hands of the state. Even the most moderate protagonist of the NEP compromise was bound to reflect on the next step, and thus on the development strategy to be followed. In the West, economic theory did not even discuss investment criteria. Such matters were encompassed within the theory of market equilibrium, and, since the very notions of development and growth were absent from the discussions, the idea of any deliberate policy with regard to investment was absent too, the more so as the bulk of capital assets and investment resources were in the private sector, and so were not subject to public policy, even if one could be imagined. Therefore the Soviet theorists and practitioners found themselves in the role of pioneers. Whatever weaknesses there may have been in their thinking and their practice, it must be emphasized that they could have learnt nothing useful from the West, which did not begin to discuss these issues until 1945, or even 1955.

As this is not a history of economic thought, these matters will be dealt with briefly. The interested reader is referred to the works listed in the Bibliography, and, so far as theory is concerned, particularly to J. M. Collette,<sup>7</sup> on whose research much of what follows is based.

There was, first, the issue of agriculture *versus* industry, and the linked questions of foreign trade and comparative advantage. The Soviet Union was a high-cost and inefficient producer of industrial goods in general, of equipment in particular. As the 'scissors' crisis underlined, it was a relatively much lower-cost agricultural producer. It might then appear to follow that the correct policy was to invest in agriculture, to increase marketable surpluses, to expand exports, and thereby to obtain industrial goods, especially capital goods, abroad. Shanin was a particularly strong supporter of this view. Of course, in the very short run this was the only possible tactic. In the absence of an adequate capital goods industry there was no alternative to buying machinery abroad in exchange for food and timber. But whereas the more radical 'industrializes' wished to orientate these purchases towards the rapid creation of the USSR's own heavy industry, Shanin and his friends envisaged a longer-term dependence on the developed West. This argument is familiar enough among development economists today; the role of agriculture is often the subject of debate.

Then there was the question of the conflict between short-

term investment criteria and strategy for development. This was related to the important issue of unemployment and the surplus labour which, by universal consent, was available in the villages. Capital was acutely scarce. There was a shortage of most goods in the aftermath of the civil war. Therefore, argued some, the most important thing was to use scarce capital to the best advantage, this being defined as maximizing employment and producing as much as possible for the least possible expenditure of capital. This policy, advocated by P. P. Maslov, led to the following practical recommendations:

(i) Capital-saving, labour-using investments were to be preferred.

(2) While one should also seek to choose investments which promoted a high or quick rate of return, the fact was recognized (twenty years before W. Arthur Lewis) that the existence of surplus labour was not adequately reflected in the wage rates and social benefits which entered into costs of production.

(3) Heavy industry required massive investments which matured over a long period. Therefore considerations of economy of scarce capital, the expansion of production in time of universal shortage and the problem of unemployment all called for priority to be given to light industry and agriculture.

However, as we know, this approach seldom satisfies the development planner. Already in 1926, Bernstein-Kogan was conscious of a dilemma or contradiction. This is how Collette summarized his argument: 'Either save investment resources by maintaining the lowest possible capital intensity, and so condemn the Soviet economy to long-term stagnation; or else renew the existing equipment intensively, develop the basic industries, install a powerful infrastructure and lower considerably the rate of return on investment.'<sup>8</sup> There was much discussion of the use of interest as a means of time-discount, as an aid to choice; but in itself it could not resolve the problem. The talented economist Bazarov, also in 1926, asserted the need to divide the economy into two - a priority sector (e.g. electrification, transport) to which the criteria of rates of return were not to be strictly applied, and the rest of the economy.

## Development Strategies

As with NEP so with theories of development, 1926 was a year in which the atmosphere changed. Perhaps this was due to the virtual completion in that year of the restoration of the pre-war economy, and a consciousness that a new investment policy was necessary. This too found its reflection in the politics of the time, with resolutions favouring industrialization high on the agenda. Needless to say, the arguments of the economists were also related to the political factions, either directly or indirectly. Thus the argument in favour of investment in agriculture and the consumers' goods industry would naturally fit into the Bukharin approach to NEP. Equally clearly, it would find little sympathy among the supporters of the left opposition, or, when he moved left, from Stalin. It is because of this (sometimes unwanted) association of theoretical arguments with factional struggles that so many of the able economists who expressed original ideas in the twenties died in prison in the thirties.

All planning, in the sense of deliberate decision-making affecting the use of resources, must represent some sort of compromise between two principles, which in Soviet discussions came to be known as 'genetic' and 'teleologicaF. The first lays stress on the existing situation: market forces, relative scarcities of factors, rates of return, profitability. The second reflects a desire to change the proportions and size of the economy, to maximize growth, to emphasize strategy of development rather than adaptation to circumstances. The conflict between the two attitudes, on both the theoretical and the practical-political planes, increased in the second half of the decade. Naturally, neither side to the argument was unaware of the need for some sort of reconciliation of the opposing principles, though the original and intelligent ex-Menshevik economist V. Groman did assert that there was some 'natural' relationship between agriculture and industry which remains (or should remain) constant over time. Most of the "protagonists were concerned with relative emphasis. Surely, as Bazarov pointed out, any plan which ignored the existing situation was doomed to failure; any plan which saw no further than the

demands of the immediate present was patently inadequate. The changing emphasis after 1926 led more and more to the stress on drastic change, and as party policy veered towards rapid industrialization one heard more and more voices advocate the priority of heavy industry, asserting the criterion of maximizing growth. The economist of this period whose name is now most familiar was Fel'dman, whose growth model has been introduced to Western readers by E. Domar.<sup>9</sup> Evidently, if the objective is the most rapid industrialization, the investment choices in any developing country are bound to be based on principles quite different to those which would minimize unemployment or economize scarce capital in the short term. As Collette has pointed out, this type of thinking was found in the West only after 1955.

Much was made, by the supporters of a sharp rise in investments, of the phrase 'extinguishing curve' *{zatukhayushchaya krivaya).* This was the forecast of a reduced rate of growth, made by a committee of VSNKH , already referred to under its abbreviation OSVOK. Its conclusions followed logically from the inevitable slowdown which would be the consequence of the end of reconstruction. In part they assumed both a rise in the capital-output ratio and a fall in the volume of investment. But the idea of a slowdown was unacceptable to the political leadership; and indeed contradicted the dynamism and optimism without which the party rank-and-file would lose much of their drive and morale. It was sharply rejected. The fact that these and other bourgeois specialists were so very cautious in their prognostications later encouraged Stalin and his colleagues to ignore 'moderate' advice.

A 'strategic' decision, much discussed at the time, concerned the so-called Urals-Kuznetsk combine. This was an immense project linking the iron ore of the Urals with the excellent coking coal of the Kuzbas, a thousand miles away in Central Siberia. It was a longterm project *par excellence.* It would lock up a great deal of capital. It could not be justified by rate-of-return calculations. It might have vast external effects in the long run. It would - it did - save the situation militarily in the event of invasion by 'imperialist' powers. The issues are fully discussed in several works in the West.<sup>10</sup> (The Urals-Kuznetsk combine project was in fact begun in 1930.)

The issue of balanced *versus* unbalanced growth, known to most economists from the (post-war) work of Hirschman and Nurkse, was also discussed in Russia at this period. In part this was included in the 'genetic-teleologicaP debate, and in part it came up as a problem of how to tackle existing or anticipated bottlenecks. Bukharin in particular advocated a careful attention to balance, and warned of the consequences of neglect of this factor which, after 1928, tended to discredit this approach, since it was associated with right-wing heresy. This was regrettable, since it affected the fate of another of the Soviet innovations: the 'balance of the national economy'. Using data from 1923-4, a group of gifted men led by Popov and Groman created the 'grandfather' of the input-output tables of later years. They invented a new idea, without which planning could hardly begin. It was necessary to trace the interconnections of the sectors composing the economy; to discover how much fuel was (or would be) needed to produce a given quantity of metal, to take just one example. The attempt was in many ways inadequate, many of the necessary data were missing. But it was the first such attempt, if one excepts Quesnay's *Tableau economique,* to which Soviet economic literature makes frequent reference.

The twenties were an intellectually exciting period. Not only were there debates among Bolshevik leaders and intellectuals, among whom were men of great eloquence and wit, but quite independent ideas were put forward by men who were not Bolsheviks at all. Gosplan and VSNK H experts included many former Mensheviks, later to be accused of being plotters and saboteurs. Men like Groman, Bazarov and Ginzburg contributed significantly to policy debates. Ex-populists, ex-SRs, were active too, for example the famous economist Kondratiev, the agricultural experts Chayanov and Chelintsev. Even non-socialists, like Litoshenko and Kutler, could raise their voices. There was a oneparty state, there were no legal means of organizing an opposition, but conditions were far from resembling the monolithic thirties. The communists were very weakly represented at this time among the planners. Thus in 1924, out of 527 employees of Gosplan, only forty-nine were party members, and twenty-three of these were drivers, watchmen, typists, etc."

The great debate, or more properly debates, must be seen as taking place at many different levels. There was the political struggle for power. There was the conflict at the political level between advocates of different policies towards the peasants, or on industrialization rates (tempos), or 'socialism in one country'. There were discussions and proposals put up by experts on investment criteria and growth strategies. Theory and practice, expert judgement and politics, interacted in various ways. Thus, not surprisingly, political men who were not allowed to express open dissent in a political way did so in their capacity as experts, just as others did so as novelists and poets. Politicians used experts, and selected statistics to suit their arguments, which eventually proved very dangerous for the experts. Thus the apparently abstract argument about peasant stratification became political dynamite, inevjtably linked with the question of the kulak danger and the steps which could or should be taken to combat it. Even so statistical an issue as the volume of marketed grain became highly 'political', as we have seen.