# **SOVEREIGN IMMUNITY**

## NEELANJAN MAITRA

#### **I. INTRODUCTION**

A neutral observer might find it odd if, upon securing freedom from a repressive colonial state, newly independent citizens should seek to permit their elected government to infringe their rights with impunity. The uninterrupted existence of the doctrine of sovereign immunity in independent India points to precisely this anomaly. The doctrine's ambit, and even its existence, have caused Indian courts considerable discomfort over the past sixty years. Yet, judicial discomfort has only very rarely translated to judicial action. Commentators studying the persistence of sovereign immunity and the related 'sovereign functions' doctrine in India might conclude that sovereign immunity 'turned on a sly continuance of the ideology and practice of the empire'.<sup> $1$ </sup> The strange survival of doctrines so routinely reviled by Indian judges as anachronistic, undemocratic, and thoroughly inappropriate must be a matter of both curiosity and concern.

One might begin by acknowledging that the precise extent to which sovereign immunity survives in India is not entirely clear. It is a truth almost universally acknowledged amongst Indian courts and commentators that the 'sovereign functions' doctrine is certainly problematic and probably dead.<sup>2</sup> These sources generally agree that the distinction between acts which are not in pursuance of 'sovereign functions'—acts for which the State may be legally liable—and acts in pursuance of 'sovereign functions'—for which the State enjoys immunity—is insufficiently principled and ultimately unsuitable for the workings of the modern Indian State. Similarly, it is also commonly accepted that, over time, a 'liberal' judiciary has gradually eroded the zone of sovereign immunity, which may have resulted in the eventual disappearance of the 'sovereign functions' doctrine.

This chapter argues that the shift from the 'sovereign functions' doctrine has been problematic in at least three ways. First, the disappearance of the doctrine was achieved at significant systemic cost, such as unacknowledged departures from precedent and the development of doctrines that encouraged the manipulation of claims. Secondly, Indian courts moved away from the doctrine of sovereign functions without providing a coherent alternative judicial account of the place and extent of sovereign immunity in India. One might wonder whether sovereign immunity itself had been discarded with the distinction between sovereign and non-sovereign functions. Finally, it is not immediately obvious that the Supreme Court need necessarily have viewed sovereign immunity through the perspective of sovereign functions at all. As the first part of this chapter hopes to show, pre-Independence Indian courts had developed a robust alternative account of sovereign immunity that did not draw on the sovereign functions doctrine—a fact the Supreme Court took more than forty years to acknowledge.

Section II of this chapter begins with an examination of the text of Article 300 of the Constitution, and a brief survey of the case law on sovereign immunity that preceded the adoption of the Constitution. It also considers some early attempts to refashion the law on sovereign immunity following Independence. Section III considers the judicial treatment of sovereign immunity in independent India and the Supreme Court's reactions to the constraints imposed by its own precedents. Section IV, studies the impact of the Court's evolution of fundamental rights doctrine on sovereign immunity. It considers changes in judicial doctrine relating to sovereign immunity in terms of the nature of the rights sought to be protected through the gradual erosion of sovereign immunity. It also examines some relatively recent developments that may have the effect of clarifying the scope and place of sovereign immunity in India and others which have significantly detracted from such clarity.

Ultimately, the chapter hopes to show that the Supreme Court's difficulties in providing a coherent account of sovereign immunity in India were largely of its own making. It also seeks to show that the Court's doctrinal manoeuvres, both in relation to public and private law claims against the State, have entailed considerable systemic costs, the extent of which may not yet be apparent.

# **II. THE CONSTITUTIONAL TEXT AND DOCTRINAL DIVERGENCE IN COLONIAL INDIA**

The Union of India's relationship with sovereign immunity is characterised by a deep ambiguity. Here, I refer to sovereign immunity as an internal matter—that is, the immunity of the sovereign in its own courts, as opposed to its external immunity in foreign courts or tribunals or in its dealings with other sovereigns. The Constitution of India makes no mention of the doctrine of sovereign immunity, although Article 300(1) recognises that the governments of the Union of India and the States may sue or be sued by their respective names, subject to any State or Central legislation.<sup>3</sup> However, sovereign immunity in India is not a statutory creation—its origins and development are entirely judicial and the scope of the doctrine has been repeatedly challenged. The fact that the constitutional text subjects the grant of legal capacity solely upon future legislation might lead one to question whether a judicially evolved doctrine, unmoored to any Central or State statute, could serve as a check upon Article 300's grant of legal capacity to sue or be sued.

While Article 300(1) contemplates future developments, Article 300(2)(a) expressly seeks to establish continuity between the newly formed Union of India and the Dominion of India that preceded it, noting that the Union of India and the States may sue or be sued 'in the like cases' as the Dominion of India and its provinces might have sued or been sued before the adoption of the Constitution.<sup>4</sup> The suggestion therefore is that the Union of India's capacity to sue or be sued is identical to that of its predecessor. Article 300(2)(b) reinforces the maintenance of continuity, noting that legal proceedings against the Dominion of India or a province would continue as if the Dominion of India had been replaced by the Union of India or the applicable State. It is this textual recognition of continuity that appears to allow for the existence of a judicial doctrine of sovereign immunity even after the passage of the Constitution.

The judicial doctrine of sovereign immunity in India considerably pre-dates the Constitution. In fact, the doctrine first appears immediately following the establishment of direct rule by the Crown and it assumes relevance because of the transition from rule by the East India Company to rule by the Crown. 5 In *Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Co v Secretary of State for India*, 6 the Supreme Court of Calcutta ruled on an act of negligence by servants of the Company towards servants of the plaintiff. Although the act of negligence had occurred during the Company's rule, the action was brought against the Crown, as successor to the Company under the Government of India Act of 1858.

The Court noted that although the Company had exercised the functions of a sovereign, it was not, in fact, sovereign and therefore did not enjoy the immunity of the Crown. The Court held that 'where an act is done, or contract is entered into, in exercise of the powers usually called sovereign powers by which we mean powers which cannot lawfully be *exercised except by a* sovereign or private individual *delegated by a sovereign* to exercise them, no action will lie'. 7

Nothing on the record suggested that the Company's servants had been negligent in their exercise of any function that had traditionally been recognised as the monopoly of the sovereign—such as, for example, the use of force. Therefore, even though the Crown enjoyed an immunity denied to the Company, there was no immunity for an offence committed while carrying out a non-sovereign function. The *Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Co* Court appears to have understood a sovereign function<sup>8</sup> to mean a function that was the monopoly of the sovereign, irrespective of whether the monopoly was a matter of precedent and tradition or was merely the product of statute. As this survey of case law hopes to show, the distinction would prove to be crucial.

The most prominent cases that followed *Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Co* took one of two positions on sovereign immunity. One line of decisions adhered, at least nominally, to the sovereign functions doctrine, although no decision appears to have undertaken any conceptual attempt to distinguish between sovereign and non-sovereign functions.<sup>9</sup> Another line of decisions, including some notable judgments of the High Courts of Madras,  $\frac{10}{10}$  Allahabad,  $\frac{11}{10}$  and Bombay,  $\frac{12}{10}$  took the view that State immunity was confined to certain 'acts of State' as well as acts done for the public safety, akin to a police power. These decisions defined an act of State as an act whose justification was derived from the sovereign's inherent power rather than from municipal law. Acts that were done pursuant to municipal law, by contrast, were justiciable even if they were a sovereign monopoly and could not be carried out by a private individual. Courts recognising immunity for acts of State held that such acts immunised both the agent and the principal, while acts done under the colour of municipal law could not serve to immunise the agent even if they were done in furtherance of a sovereign function.<sup>13</sup>

Reliance on the concept of acts of State rather than sovereign functions serves to distinguish this line of cases from the decision in *P&O Steam Navigation Co.* The distinction was not merely semantic. The act of State decisions appear to have understood an act of State to mean 'an act of the sovereign power directed against another sovereign power or the subjects of another sovereign power not owing temporary allegiance, in pursuance of sovereign rights of waging war or maintaining peace on the high seas or abroad'. <sup>14</sup> The mere fact that the sovereign was the sole entity empowered to undertake an act did not suffice to make it an act of State—in fact the grant of a statutory monopoly in favour of the sovereign served to make an act justiciable rather than immune. By contrast, the decision in *P&O Steam Navigation Co* had, at least on its face, expressed no preference as to whether the sovereign's monopoly was rooted in custom, tradition, or statute. The act of state decisions sought to define the State by a higher standard than sovereign functions, apparently pointing to a collection of powers that served to distinguish the State from any other legal entity. Despite their desire to restrict the defence of sovereign immunity to only those acts that were truly sovereign, these courts did not, and perhaps could not, ever exhaustively enumerate the distinguishing characteristics of sovereignty that might serve to immunise an act from judicial review. The act of State decisions ultimately appear to have rested on some formal, almost Hobbesian, judicial conception of the State.

A historian looking at the divergent decisions on sovereign immunity might well ask whether they produced divergent results in the context of the colonial State. On its face, the 'act of State' decisions

would appear to immunise only the most fundamental acts of the paramount power, the British Crown, while leaving the acts of lower administrative officials open to judicial review. The 'sovereign functions' decisions, on the other hand, seemingly treat the colonial State and its officials more sympathetically, affording immunity even to lower officials acting in pursuance of sovereign powers.

Although this hypothesis would have to be tested in far greater detail to be validated, a very brief review of some decisions seems to support the suggestion. For example, courts applying the sovereign functions doctrine recognised immunity for injuries arising out of the making or repairing of a military road, <sup>15</sup> for the negligent seizure of property pursuant to statutory authority,  $\frac{16}{10}$  for the negligence of officers of the court of wards in the administration of the estate in their charge, <sup>17</sup> for the wrongful removal of an agent by a labour supply association,  $\frac{18}{18}$  and for the wrongful refusal to issue a licence to sell liquors and drugs under excise law. $\frac{19}{12}$  Courts applying the act of state doctrine, by contrast, recognised no defence of immunity in cases involving the payment of excess import duties,  $\frac{20}{20}$ the requisitioning of property in peacetime,  $\frac{21}{2}$  and the illegal seizure of arms.  $\frac{22}{2}$ 

## **III. SOVEREIGN IMMUNITYIN INDEPENDENT INDIA: THE SEARCH FOR PRINCIPLE**

The divergence in doctrines and outcomes in pre-Constitution sovereign immunity cases was remarked on extensively in the First Report of the Law Commission of India in 1956.<sup>23</sup> After noting economic trends such as the nationalisation of various industries and public utilities and the establishment of State-owned corporations, the Law Commission considered the place of the State's tortious liability 'in the context of a welfare State'.<sup>24</sup>

The Law Commission observed that 'When the Constitution was framed, the question to what extent, if any, the Union and the States should be made liable for the tortious acts of their servants or agents was left for future legislation.<sup>25</sup> This statement, taken by itself, might suggest that the Law Commission took the view that Article 300's grant of legal capacity was qualified only by future legislation and not by the existing case law on sovereign immunity. However, a few paragraphs later, the Law Commission seemed to contradict this, stating that 'The old distinction between sovereign and non-sovereign functions or governmental and non-governmental functions should not be invoked to determine the liability of the State'—which suggests that the Law Commission thought that the doctrine, though flawed, was nevertheless still good law.<sup>26</sup>

In place of the sovereign functions doctrine, the Law Commission proposed to look to the 'nature and form of the activity<sup> $27$ </sup> in question and provided a list of general principles on which future legislation relating to the State's tortious liability should be based. Especially notable amongst these principles were a series of exceptions from tortious liability. The first exception provided that the 'defense of "Act of State" should be made available to the State for any act, neglect or default of its servants or agent' and defined an 'Act of State' in precisely the same terms used by the Privy Council and the Bombay High Court, namely as 'an act of the sovereign power directed against another sovereign power or the subjects of another sovereign power not owing temporary allegiance, in pursuance of sovereign rights'.<sup>28</sup> The Law Commission then proceeded to provide a lengthy list of additional exceptions such as 'acts done in the exercise of political functions of the State', 'acts done in relation to the Defense Forces', and various miscellaneous exceptions for claims arising out of

defamation, malicious prosecution, and malicious arrest.<sup>29</sup>

In its quest for a model for the welfare State, the Law Commission had taken the act of State line of decisions, with their restricted view of immunity and had merely sought to supplement them by a list of additional exceptions. The Law Commission's introductory words about the growing public sector and nationalisation notwithstanding, it is hard to discern the principles at play in its proposed formulation of sovereign immunity. What additional role, for example, would the act of State exception play, given the various specific exceptions provided for in connection with political acts, the defence forces, the maintenance of foreign relations, and acts done during a state of emergency? This and other questions regarding the Law Commission's report remained academic since the report's recommendations were never adopted and no legislation on sovereign immunity was ever passed. However, the divergence of pre-constitutional precedents on sovereign immunity that the Law Commission identified would never be seriously considered by an Indian court until the 1990s. Yet, the absence of a single unified line of judicial precedents and the lack of clarity on the scope of sovereign immunity continued to produce inconsistent judicial decisions for decades to come. The Supreme Court's decisions on sovereign immunity over a span of nearly forty years suggest that the pre-Constitution past considered by the Law Commission's report is not dead; it is not even past.

Six years after the Law Commission's report, in *State of Rajasthan v Vidhyawati* (hereinafter *Vidhyawati*),<sup>30</sup> the Supreme Court considered the scope of sovereign immunity under Article 300 for the first time since the adoption of the Constitution. The case, which involved a fatality resulting from the negligent driving of a government jeep by an employee of the State of Rajasthan, involved no sovereign function in either the sense of a function which was traditionally the State's monopoly or in the sense of a function solely entrusted to the State by statute. Rajasthan nevertheless sought immunity under the sovereign functions defence by claiming that sovereign functions extended to cover all activities of a State that were not commercial. This broad claim, which would have extended immunity well beyond the boundaries established in *Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Co*, was rejected by the Supreme Court. However, the Supreme Court did not entirely reject the idea of sovereign function or a sovereign power, noting only that the jeep was being driven back for repairs, rather than on State business. The Court appeared to agree that sovereign immunity would likely have been available if the jeep were being driven for a military or public purpose.<sup>31</sup>

More significantly, the *Vidhyawati* Court provided some general guidance as to the State's liability. First, following its survey of a chain of enactments, the Court held that the vicarious liability in tort of the Government of India and the States under the Constitution was identical to that of its predecessors, namely the Crown and the East India Company.<sup>32</sup> Secondly, the Court seemed to indicate that the scope of such immunity was appropriate to the type of 'socialistic State' that had been established by the Constitution.<sup>33</sup> Echoing the Law Commission's report, the Court noted that the State had assumed a number of functions, including certain commercial ones. Therefore, according to the Court, it was 'too much to claim that the State should be immune from the consequences of tortious acts of its employees committed in the course of their employment as such'.<sup>34</sup> Like the East India Company, the post-Independence Indian State 'functioned not only as a Government with sovereign powers' but 'also carried on trade and commerce, as also public transport like railways, posts and telegraphs and road transport business'.<sup>35</sup> Accordingly, the Court held that the liability of the post-Independence Indian State ought to resemble the liability of the East India Company more than it resembled the liability of the Crown in pre-Independence India.<sup>36</sup>

The *Vidhyawati* decision may have raised more questions than it answered. While the Law

Commission had unequivocally sought the end of the sovereign functions doctrine, the *Vidhyawati* Court appeared to view the doctrine as binding precedent, while simultaneously suggesting that it might be unfit for use by a 'socialistic' State.<sup>37</sup> The Law Commission had pointed to the increased role of the State in commercial and other activities as a reason to determine a new zone of immunity, which was responsive both to citizens' right to redress as well as the State's welfare responsibilities. The *Vidhyawati* Court, on the other hand, regarded the State's increased welfare role as a reason for restricting sovereign immunity to a smaller space than it had occupied in pre-Independence India. Given the Court's clear preference for a restricted form of sovereign immunity, it is unclear why the Court did not proffer the act of State line of decisions as an alternative model, especially since the Law Commission had enthusiastically endorsed the act of State doctrine. It is possible that the Court refrained from positing alternative conceptions of sovereign immunity as a matter of judicial restraint. It is also possible that the Court thought it unnecessary to consider other doctrines simply because the State of Rajasthan had no defence even under the more immunity-friendly doctrine of sovereign functions. In any event, the *Vidhyawati* Court's failure to conclusively determine the applicability of the sovereign functions doctrine in independent India resulted in continued judicial confusion and apparently irreconcilable outcomes.

The continuing relevance of the sovereign functions doctrine was manifest in the Supreme Court's next major foray into sovereign immunity in *Kasturilal Ralia Ram Jain v State of Uttar Pradesh* (hereinafter *Kasturilal*). <sup>38</sup> Unlike *Vidhyawati, Kasturilal* almost certainly involved a tort committed in the exercise of a sovereign function—gold seized from the appellant by the police was negligently stored in police custody and then misappropriated by a head constable. A five-judge bench of the Supreme Court led by Gajendragadkar CJ held that no action for damages would lie if a tortious act committed by a public servant in discharge of statutory functions were based on the delegation of the sovereign powers of the State to such public servant. For the Court, the power to arrest a person, to search him, and to seize his property, were 'powers conferred on the specified officers by statute and in the last analysis, they are powers which can be properly characterized as sovereign power' and accordingly, no action for damages would lie.<sup>39</sup>

Although the *Kasturilal* Court recognised the State of Uttar Pradesh's immunity in the exercise of sovereign powers, it did so with deep unease. The Court noted that it had 'been disturbed by the thought that a citizen whose property was seized by the process of law, has to be told, when he seeks a remedy in a court of law on the ground that his property has not been returned to him, that he can make no claim against the State'.  $\frac{40}{10}$  However, although the Court explicitly agreed that this was 'not a very satisfactory position in law', it nevertheless took the view that only the legislature could impose restrictions on sovereign immunity. <sup>41</sup> To this end, the *Kasturilal* Court, like the *Vidhyawati* Court, pointed to the narrowing of sovereign immunity by statute in the United Kingdom and asked that the 'Legislatures in India seriously consider whether they should not pass legislative enactments to regulate and control their claim from immunity in cases like this on the same lines as has been done in England by the Crown Proceedings Act, 1947.<sup>242</sup>

It is difficult to disagree with the Supreme Court's observation that the facts of *Kasturilal*'s case were very different from *Vidhyawati*'s. In fact, in *Kasturilal*'s case, a defence of sovereign immunity might have been successful even by the standards of the act of State doctrine. However, it is equally difficult to comprehend why neither the *Vidhyawati* Court nor the *Kasturilal* Court sought to deviate from the sovereign functions doctrine, despite their clear disapproval of that doctrine's workings. The sovereign functions precedents were undoubtedly legally valid, but, as decisions of various preIndependence High Courts, they could not have bound the Supreme Court. It is also unclear why the Supreme Court made no effort to draw upon the equally valid line of act of State decisions, despite the Law Commission's endorsement of these cases. The Supreme Court's emphasis on legislative intervention as the only appropriate source of restriction upon sovereign liability suggested that the Court privileged the text of Article 300(1) of the Constitution over the continuity of legal doctrine sought to be preserved by Article 300(2).

Legal doctrines may become 'jagged' where they lack substantial congruence with applicable social propositions. Eisenberg notes that 'Conduct that an actor has reason to know is inconsistent with norms and policies that have substantial social support will not often be morally justified.<sup> $43$ </sup> Such jaggedness may promote doctrinal instability, which may lead to the doctrine's modification or disappearance over a period of time. If *Vidhyawati*'s case betrayed the first signs of jaggedness of the sovereign functions doctrine, the appeal for legislative intervention by the Supreme Court in *Kasturilal*'s case made it plain that the Court thought the doctrine socially incongruent.

In *Vidhyawati*'s case, the Court could apply the sovereign functions doctrine without having produced what it considered a socially incongruous result because no sovereign function was involved and sovereign immunity would not apply. A similar outcome prevailed in *Shyam Sunder v State of Rajasthan*,  $\frac{44}{ }$  where the claim concerned a fatality caused by a fire in a defective truck engaged in the State of Rajasthan's famine relief works. The Court cited *Kasturilal* to acknowledge the applicability of the sovereign functions doctrine, but ruled that famine relief was not a sovereign function and sovereign immunity would therefore not apply.<sup>45</sup>

The Court's ability to acknowledge the sovereign functions doctrine without using it to grant immunity was constrained in cases such as *Kasturilal*, which inarguably involved the exercise of a sovereign function. The *Kasturilal* Court's admission that the outcome was socially unacceptable may have formed the basis for some seemingly divergent results in cases similar to *Kasturilal*'s. For instance, three years after *Kasturilal*, in *State of Gujarat v Memon Mahomed Haji Hasam* (hereinafter *Memon Mahomed*), <sup>46</sup> a three-judge bench of the Supreme Court was confronted with facts similar to those in *Kasturilal*. Two trucks and a station wagon belonging to the respondent were seized by the customs authorities of Junagadh, the predecessor entity of the present State of Gujarat. The vehicles had been negligently kept in the open and a number of parts had been stolen. The Supreme Court held that the precedents in *Vidhyawati* and *Kasturilal* were inapplicable, reasoning that the parties' pleadings and the cause of action had been based in provisions of the Junagadh Customs Act, rather than in tort law and that the defence of sovereign immunity had not been raised at the first opportunity. $\frac{47}{1}$ 

The *Memon Mahomed* decision is hard to reconcile with *Kasturilal*. The Supreme Court's assertion that the cause of action was founded in statute rather than in tort is unlikely to have served as sufficient basis to distinguish it from *Kasturilal*. As the *Memon Mahomed* Court undoubtedly knew, the *Kasturilal* Court had engaged in a relatively detailed discussion of the Uttar Pradesh Police Regulations and Kasturilal's property had been seized under Section 550 of the Criminal Procedure Code. The fact that the powers had been conferred by statute did not serve to diminish their sovereign character. The powers in question in *Memon Mahomed*'s case—the power to seize and detain property—should have similarly been treated as sovereign powers conferred by statute whose exercise would be protected by immunity.

Ten years after *Memon Mahomed*'s case, in *Basavva Kom Dyamangouda Patil v State of Mysore* (hereinafter *Basavva Kom*), <sup>48</sup> a three-judge bench of the Supreme Court once again considered
certain facts that were similar to those in *Kasturilal*. Ornaments stolen from the appellant were recovered by the police but were stolen once again from the guard room of the police station where the Chief Judicial Magistrate had ordered them to be stored. As in *Kasturilal*, the Court's power to retain custody of the property in question was founded in statute, the Criminal Procedure Code. The negligence of the police in storing the stolen property was in pursuance of this statutory power, which was ultimately based in the sovereign power to administer justice. Yet, the Supreme Court's brief opinion ordering the State to pay the appellant the value of the stolen property made no mention of sovereign immunity, or of the decisions in *Vidhyawati* or *Kasturilal*, stating only that the case raised 'a short point of law regarding the powers of the Court in indemnifying the owner of the property which is destroyed or lost whilst in custody of the Court'.  $\frac{49}{1}$ 

In the absence of the legislative intervention sought by the *Kasturilal* Court, the Supreme Court appeared to have dispensed with the sovereign functions doctrine in similar cases by simply ignoring binding precedents (as in *Basavva Kom*) or by drawing procedural distinctions (as in *Memon Mahomed*). However, these judicial manoeuvres could not, by themselves, have addressed the longterm doctrinal instability created by the repeated assertions of the Supreme Court and the Law Commission as to the inadequacy and inappropriateness of the sovereign functions doctrine in independent India. Instead, the Supreme Court ultimately bypassed precedents such as *Vidhyawati* and *Kasturilal* through the use of newer doctrines grounded in the Constitution. Initially, decisions concerning these new doctrines did not expressly consider the issue of sovereign immunity. However, the development and increasing use of these doctrines by the Supreme Court and High Courts meant that the apparent conflict with sovereign immunity and the sovereign functions decisions could not be indefinitely delayed. When this conflict did arise, the constitutional provenance of these new doctrines would serve as the basis for a newer, more restrictive theory of sovereign immunity.

## **1. Hollowing Out Sovereign Immunity: The Fundamental Rights Cases**

The expansion in the Supreme Court's fundamental rights jurisprudence in the 1980s was not merely an expansive reading of the rights themselves. There is a considerable body of scholarship to indicate at least four overlapping doctrinal developments, which made the expansive reading of fundamental rights possible:

1. the judicial expansion of the definition of the State under Article 12, against which fundamental rights were to be asserted; $\frac{50}{2}$ 

2. the liberal conception of standing to enforce fundamental rights and the related development of public interest litigation;<sup>51</sup>

3. the expansive reading of the right to life under Article  $21\frac{52}{1}$  and the judicial treatment of Articles 14, 19, and 21 interconnected; $\frac{53}{2}$  and

4. the use of private law remedies such as damages for violations of fundamental rights.  $\frac{54}{5}$ 

To these four conditions, one might add the relative quiescence of the Indian State, particularly its inability or reluctance to use sovereign immunity as a defence. Despite the favourable precedent in *Kasturilal*, the Union of India and the States do not appear to have invariably asserted immunity as a defence in their own courts, as the *Memon Mahomed* and *Basavva Kom* cases suggest. This

inconsistent assertion of sovereign immunity, coupled with an expanding fundamental rights jurisprudence, may have combined to gradually erode the zone of sovereign immunity from the early 1980s onwards.

One illustrative example of the State's continuing inability or reluctance to make use of its sovereign immunity is the case of *Rudul Sah v State of Bihar*, <sup>55</sup> where a three-judge bench of the Supreme Court ordered the payment of palliative compensation to a petitioner who had been illegally imprisoned after acquittal. Noting that the State had not claimed that damages in tort was the only relief available to the petitioner, the Court held that it was not only empowered under Article 32 of the Constitution to award monetary relief for the breach of a fundamental right but that such award was in addition to, rather than in place of, compensation under a civil suit.<sup>56</sup>

The doctrinal move in *Rudul Sah*, the award of monetary damages for fundamental rights, was assisted by two omissions by the State of Bihar. First, the State of Bihar made no attempt to plead its sovereign immunity for the exercise of what was clearly the exercise of its sovereign function in its response to the petitioner's *habeas corpus* petition under Article 32. Secondly, the State of Bihar did not make the argument that a civil suit was the exclusive means by which to recover damages. Thus, cases such as *Rudul Sah*, which awarded damages for violations of fundamental rights, overcame inconvenient case law as to sovereign immunity by simply not addressing the issue.<sup>57</sup> Most importantly, such precedents served to show that tort claims (and perhaps even contract claims) might be most effectively asserted by either being coupled with, or being presented as, fundamental rights violations. Future petitioners could entirely dispense with the meandering process of civil litigation in the lower courts by the simple expedient of filing a petition under Article 32 before the Supreme Court.

It was not until 1989 that a fundamental rights claim was sought to be resisted by a defence of sovereign immunity, and the case, like *Vidhyawati* and *Kasturilal*, arose as a civil suit rather than a petition under Article 32. In *Challa Ramkonda Reddy v State of Andhra Pradesh* (hereinafter *Challa* Ramkonda Reddy),<sup>58</sup> the plaintiffs sought to recover damages for negligence, which led to the murder of the deceased while in police custody. The High Court of Andhra Pradesh, in a decision that was subsequently affirmed by the Supreme Court, agreed that the arrest and detention of the deceased had been carried out under a sovereign function, but held that sovereign immunity could not be a defence to a violation of the rights protected under Article 21. The High Court also expressly noted that sovereign immunity was unavailable as a defence to a suit claiming a violation of a fundamental right, irrespective of whether the claim was put forward through a petition under Article 32 or a civil suit.<sup>59</sup>

After the decision in *Challa Ramkonda Reddy*'s case, there is practically no doubt that sovereign immunity is no defence to a violation of a fundamental right. It is, however, worth asking whether, and when, sovereign immunity is ever a meaningful defence. Clearly, the residual category of cases to which sovereign immunity may be pleaded as a defence are those actions against the State that are grounded solely in tort or contract or in a statutory right and that do not simultaneously allege the violation of a fundamental right. The Supreme Court's recent decision in *Nilabati Behera v State of Orissa* appears to recognise this,  $\frac{60}{60}$  noting that even where a defence of sovereign immunity may be available as a defence against a tortious claim, it would not be available for a claim based on the same facts presented as a violation of fundamental rights.<sup>61</sup>

Following the Supreme Court's expansion of fundamental rights, however, one might wonder why any plaintiff would present his case thus, especially given the overwhelming procedural advantages and savings in time and cost represented by petitions before the High Courts and the Supreme Court. In this sense, although the High Court of Andhra Pradesh may have restored some degree of parity to civil litigants by noting that sovereign immunity cannot be a defence to civil suits where a fundamental right has been violated, its decision was almost redundant, given the rarity with which fundamental rights are sought to be redressed by civil suits.

The Supreme Court's expansive reading of the fundamental rights meant that sovereign immunity was all but extinguished, not only as a defence to public law claims, but also as a defence to the majority of private law claims against the State simply because many of these claims can be presented as violations of fundamental rights covered by Articles 19 and  $21\frac{62}{5}$  The similar doctrinal expansion of Article 14, which now treats any form of arbitrary State action as a violation of the right to equality,  $\frac{63}{5}$  is likewise capable of checking and providing redress against various forms of legislative or regulatory action.

## **2. Clarity and Confusion:** *Nagendra Rao* **and Beyond**

Despite the remarkable development of the Court's fundamental rights jurisprudence, the sovereign functions doctrine had never quite been rendered entirely extinct. Even in *Challa Ramkonda Reddy*'s case, the High Court of Andhra Pradesh (and later, the Supreme Court) had agreed only that sovereign immunity, and the sovereign functions doctrine that supported it, was no defence to a fundamental rights claim, apparently agreeing that sovereign immunity could be a defence to a private law claim founded in tort, contract or statute. A subsequent case*—N Nagendra Rao & Co v State of Andhra Pradesh* (hereinafter *Nagendra Rao)—*would provide doctrinal development of signal importance, building on *Challa Ramkonda Reddy*'s consideration of the interaction between private law claims and the defence of sovereign immunity.<sup>64</sup>

In *Nagendra Rao*, a division bench of the Supreme Court considered a situation similar to *Kasturilal*. The appellant, a licensed trader in fertiliser and foodgrain, had a large amount of stock confiscated by the police. No attempt was made to properly store the stock, despite applications to that effect by the appellant, resulting in the deterioration of the stock while in police custody. In considering the resulting appeal from the civil suit for damages, the *Nagendra Rao* Court made several doctrinal advances. First, after a lengthy excursus in which it considered the *Manusmriti*, the Charvaka school of philosophy, as well as mediaeval and modern Indian history, the Court held that sovereign immunity as a defence was 'never available where the State was involved in commercial or private undertaking nor is it available where its officers are guilty of interfering with life and liberty of a citizen not warranted by law'.  $65$  The second part of this proposition appears tautological. It suggests that sovereign immunity is a defence only when the State interferes with life or liberty in a manner warranted by law. Thus, sovereign immunity would only be a defence when it was not required to be a defence, since the State had acted within the law.

Secondly, and far more importantly, the *Nagendra Rao* Court noted that while decisions concerning fundamental rights had held that sovereign immunity could not be a defence in public law cases, 'the shadow of sovereign immunity still haunts the private law' <sup>66</sup> because of decisions such as *Kasturilal* and the absence of remedial legislation. Finally, the *Nagendra Rao* Court did what the Supreme Court had hitherto failed to do. It recognised the act of State line of cases and suggested that *Kasturilal* was incorrectly decided because it had not taken these decisions into consideration. This was an invaluable doctrinal contribution, and the Court then resurrected the act of State doctrine, holding that *Kasturilal* would confer immunity only in cases involving the exercise of an 'inalienable function' of the State such as the maintenance of law and order.<sup>67</sup>

The importance of the *Nagendra Rao* decision cannot be overestimated. It constitutes the Supreme Court's belated acknowledgement of its failure to develop an adequate account of sovereign immunity for private law cases. The Court also showed that the sovereign functions doctrine was not the only judicial approach to sovereign immunity and that other judicial precedents could be used to fashion a restrictive doctrine of sovereign immunity in private law cases; a doctrine substantially similar to the act of State doctrine. As a division bench, the *Nagendra Rao* Court could not have overturned *Kasturilal*. However, through its revival of the act of State doctrine, it effectively confined the application of *Kasturilal* to cases involving an exercise of the State's inalienable powers. With these three steps, the Court had effectively reversed over thirty years of precedent and provided an account of sovereign immunity that might stand the test of doctrinal stability.

The *Nagendra Rao* decision should have heralded a new era of clarity in the application of sovereign immunity by the Supreme Court. Two subsequent decisions of the Supreme Court ensured that it did not. In *Common Cause, A Registered Society v Union of India* (hereinafter *Common* Cause),<sup>68</sup> the Supreme Court appeared to blur the distinction between sovereign functions and an act of State. More seriously, in *The Chairman, Railway Board v Chandrima Das* (hereinafter *Chandrima Das*),  $\frac{69}{2}$  the Supreme Court seemingly dragged the sovereign functions doctrine back into existence and undid the progress made by *Nagendra Rao*.

*Common Cause* concerned the Supreme Court's review of its earlier decision regarding a writ petition alleging *mala fides* in the allotment of petrol outlets by the then Minister of State for Petroleum and Natural Gas. In its consideration of the contention that the allotment of petrol outlets was an act of State beyond judicial review, the Supreme Court cited the *Nagendra Rao* decision, referred to the act of State cases, and quoted passages from the Law Commission's report.<sup>70</sup> The Court then proceeded to state that the allotment of petrol outlets was not an act of State because the 'traditional sovereign functions were the making of laws, the administration of justice, the maintenance of order, the repression of crime, carrying on of war, the making of treaties of peace and other consequential functions'.<sup>71</sup> The Court thus appeared to view an act of State as indistinguishable from the narrow category of traditional sovereign functions.

It will be recalled that this was not quite the formulation of the Bombay High Court which, following the Privy Council, had defined an act of State as an 'act of the sovereign power directed against another sovereign power or the subjects of another sovereign power not owing temporary allegiance, in pursuance of sovereign rights'.<sup>72</sup> For the Bombay High Court, what truly defined an act of State was not merely the character of the act itself but also the entities against which the act was directed and the rights pursuant to which the sovereign acted.

If the *Common Cause* decision's confusion was primarily semantic, the *Chandrima Das* decision seems to potentially trigger a far more serious doctrinal controversy. *Chandrima Das* concerned an appeal from a petition under Article 226 brought in the Calcutta High Court on behalf of a foreign national who had been raped by government employees on government premises in West Bengal. The respondents put forward, among other arguments, the defence that the Union of India could not be held vicariously liable for the offence of rape committed by Railways' employees because the rape was not an act in the course of their official duties. The argument may well have entirely lacked merit. However, what it clearly was not was an attempt to invoke the defence of sovereign immunity. In fact, the argument was the opposite of the sovereign functions doctrine, since the Union of India was asking that liability only attach to its servants in their personal capacity precisely because the servants were *not* performing a sovereign or statutory function.

For reasons that are unclear, the Supreme Court appeared to treat this argument as an argument for sovereign immunity, based on a theory of sovereign functions. It went on to state:

The theory of Sovereign power which was propounded in *Kasturilal*'s case has yielded to new theories and is no longer available in a welfare State. It may be pointed out that functions of the Govt. in a welfare State are manifold, all of which cannot be said to be the activities relating to exercise of Sovereign powers. The functions of the State not only relate to the defence of the country or the administration of justice, but they extend to many other spheres as, for example, education, commercial, social, economic, political and even marital. These activities cannot be said to be related to Sovereign power.<sup>33</sup>

Thus, in a single paragraph, in response to an argument that had never been made, the *Chandrima Das* Court had breathed new life into the sovereign functions doctrine that the *Nagendra Rao* Court had laboured to bury. In his scathing criticism of the *Lemon* test concerning the establishment of religion, Scalia J had once memorably written: 'Like some ghoul in a late-night horror movie that repeatedly sits up in its grave and shuffles abroad, after being repeatedly killed and buried, *Lemon* stalks our Establishment Clause jurisprudence once again ...<sup>'74</sup> After *Chandrima Das*, critics of the sovereign functions doctrine should fear the worst. The doctrine is not yet dead.

## **IV. CONCLUSION**

If the *Vidhyawati* Court had taken notice of the act of State line of decisions, sovereign immunity in India might well have had a very different history. Once the *Vidhyawati* and *Kasturilal* decisions were in place, however, the Court had effectively surrendered the development of the doctrine of sovereign immunity to the legislature. This chapter has considered, at some length, how the Supreme Court sought to escape the constraints that it had placed upon itself in *Vidhyawati* and *Kasturilal*, first by simply ignoring these inconvenient precedents and then by bypassing them through the evolution of new doctrines in fundamental rights cases. The Court's judicial manoeuvring may have been ingenious or insufficiently principled, depending on one's perspective. However, it is certainly curious why the legislature never sought to respond to the judiciary's repeated pleas for intervention. In this sense, legislative silence and inaction, as much as judicial assertion, have served to shape the law of sovereign immunity in India.

One partial reason for the legislature's studied silence may lie in the rather inconsistent assertion of sovereign immunity by the Union of India and the States in their own courts. A plea of sovereign immunity was not raised in a fundamental rights case until 1989. Even in cases involving private law claims against the State, as in *Memon Mahomed* and *Basavva Kom*, the State often omitted the claim of sovereign immunity, despite the presence of recent, very favourable precedents such as *Kasturilal*. One might therefore consider the absence of legislative intervention to be rooted in the fact that sovereign immunity was not asserted rigorously enough or often enough to be considered a significant barrier to the litigation of claims against the State. It is overly ambitious to attribute to government litigators a conscious intention to permit the gradual erosion of sovereign immunity through its nonassertion before Indian courts. It is, however, reasonable to suggest that the Supreme Court would have found it harder to bypass its own inconvenient precedents without the omissions of various government counsels in suits in courts all over India.

If the Supreme Court did ultimately succeed in creating a new, restrictive doctrine of sovereign

immunity (a conclusion which the *Chandrima Das* decision appears to throw into doubt), it did so at considerable doctrinal cost. Its fundamental rights jurisprudence may have eased access to justice for very many poor litigants, but it did so by considerably easing evidentiary burdens, by promoting the representation of what were essentially tortious or statutory claims as breaches of fundamental rights, and by potentially precipitating conflicts with other branches of government. A far harder but ultimately more important task would have been to improve civil litigation processes so that civil litigants might enforce their claims without the exorbitant expenditure of time and resources. It is undeniably true that the Supreme Court could not have achieved systemic reform on this scale on its own, but the failure of the project may have ultimately caused untold harm to both individual litigants and India's legal system.

<sup>1</sup> Uday S Mehta, 'Constitutionalism' in Niraja Gopal Jayal and Pratap Bhanu Mehta (eds), *The Oxford Companion to Politics in India* (Oxford University Press 2010), citing Homi Bhabha, *The Location of Culture* (Routledge 1994) 86.

<sup>2</sup> Eg, HM Seervai, *Constitutional Law of India: A Critical Commentary*, vol 1 (4th edn, Universal Law Publishing 2008) 2133.

 $3$  Constitution of India 1950, art 300(1):

The Governor of India may sue or be sued by the name of the Union and the Government of a State may sue or be sued by the name of the State and may, subject to any provisions which may be made by Act of Parliament or of the Legislature of such State enacted by virtue of powers conferred by this Constitution, sue or be sued in relation to their respective affairs in the like cases as the Dominion of India and the corresponding Provinces or the corresponding Indian States might have sued or been sued if this Constitution had not been enacted.

 $\frac{4}{3}$  Constitution of India 1950, art 300(2):

If at the commencement of this Constitution

(a) any legal proceedings are pending to which the Dominion of India is a party, the Union of India shall be deemed to be substituted for the Dominion in those proceedings; and

(b) any legal proceedings are pending to which a Province or an Indian State is a party, the corresponding State shall be deemed to be substituted for the Province or the Indian State in those proceedings.

<span id="page-12-0"></span><sup>5</sup> *Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Co v Secretary of State for India* (1868–69) 5 Bom HCR App A1.

<sup>6</sup> Well before the decision in *Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Co*, in *Dhackjee Dadajee v The East India Company* (1843) 2 Morley's Digest 307 [Supreme Court of Bombay], an action was brought against the East India Company in respect of a trespass committed by a Superintendent of Police under a warrant issued by the Governor-in-Council. Sir Thomas Erskine Perry, then Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Bombay, ruled that prior to the Charter Act of 1833 no distinction had been made between the political and commercial acts of the Company but ruled that because the Company had neither authorised, nor ratified, nor been in a position to control the act of trespass, the Company bore no liability. Significantly, however, the decision made no reference to sovereign immunity of the Crown or its application to the affairs of the Company.

<sup>7</sup> *Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Co* ([n](#page-12-0) 5) 14 (emphasis added).

 $\frac{8}{3}$  This chapter will occasionally use 'sovereign functions' interchangeably with 'sovereign power', because decisions have typically used the terms interchangeably as well.

<sup>9</sup> Although some decisions did seek to introduce variations. Eg, in *Secretary of State for India v Cockcraft* (1916) ILR 39 Mad 351, Seshagiri Ayyar J added the qualification that if the State had derived benefit from the exercise of the sovereign power, it would be liable.

<sup>10</sup> *The Secretary of State for India v Hari Bhanji* (1882) ILR 5 Mad 273.

<span id="page-12-1"></span><sup>11</sup> *Kishanchand v Secretary of State for India* (1881) ILR 2 All 829.

<sup>12</sup> *PV Rao v Khushaldas S Advani* AIR 1949 Bom 277 (subsequently affirmed by the Supreme Court in *Province of Bombay v Khushaldas S Advani* AIR 1950 SC 222).

<sup>13</sup> *AM Ross v Secretary of State for India* AIR 1915 Mad 434.

<sup>14</sup> *Eshugbayi Eleko v The Officer Administering the Government of Nigeria* [1931] AC 662 (PC), cited in *PV Rao* (n [12\)](#page-12-1) [11]. The Supreme Court considered the definition again in *Memon Haji Ismail Haji* in determining that the act of the Dominion of India in assuming the administration of Junagadh State was an act of state. *State of Saurastra v Memon Haji Ismail Haji* AIR 1959 SC 1383 [12], citing *Salaman v Secretary of State for India* [1906] 1 KB 613, 640 [CA], defined an act of state in the terms used by Fletcher