# 17 The justice of human rights in Indian constitutionalism<sup>1</sup>

Upendra Baxi

## Prefatory observations

Talking about the 'justice' of rights runs many a narrative risk. For one thing, the formations of erudite 'Indian political thought' remain relatively unmarked with any sustained theoretical/philosophic attention to approaches to justice and human rights.<sup>2</sup> Nor is it easy to fall back upon the resources of practical reason provided by such organic intellectuals as Phule, Gandhi, Ambedkar, Nehru, Acharya Narendra Dev, Ram Manohar Lohia, M. N. Roy, Vinoba Bhave and Jayaprakash Narayan; they engaged preciously with 'injustice' of the liberal and libertarian theories of rights, but it remains an open question whether they, save Ambedkar (see Baxi 1995; 2002a), proposed any general theory of justice and rights, at least in the way contemporaneously understood (Parekh and Pantham 1987). In any event, future tasks of the retrieval of their praxes should remain relevant to 'context sensitive' contrasted with 'context freedom' oriented organic knowledges concerning ideas of freedom, justice and rights.

Further, contemporary liberal theoretical approaches to justice/rights remain richly diverse and not fully exhausted by distinctions/divisions into 'libertarian' and 'liberal', cosmopolitan as well as communitarian – too formidable a territory to be visited here, even if one had the necessary cognitive/epistemic visa at hand! At least then from the edges, borders, outsides of this vast philosophic continent, an intrepid observer may venture to say that the discourse concerning the justice of rights has moved away from the paradigm of justice as a virtue of individual human conduct to the notion of justice as a virtue of the 'basic' structure of a just society, assuring fair and equal arrangement for production/reproduction of ongoing social cooperation and collaboration. Overall, these approaches seek to reconcile, in diverse ways, the conflicted domains of 'liberty' and 'equality', and insist that a just social and political order remains inconceivable outside recognition and respect for equal worth and dignity of all human beings, regardless of the happenstance of birth, blood and belonging. Justice cannot be thought of any longer outside some affirmation of respect for human rights, regardless of the multifarious disagreements concerning the nature, number, limits, and negotiability of human rights.<sup>3</sup> Put another way, the issue now concerns the ethical viability of the 'thin' as contrasted with the 'thick' descriptions of rights, in all their accompanying varied justifications.

## Constitutionalism: the history of nothing?

In trying to situate my understanding of the justice of rights in contexts of constitutionalism, I risk non-conversation with the other practitioners of 'Indian political thought' represented in the present volume. Contemporary Indian political and social theory resolutely bypasses the many discursive worlds of the Indian constitutional development and the place of justice and rights within these. To be sure, the worlds of constitutionalism remain exigent and normatively untidy; yet the same worlds have cross-fertilized disciplines other than 'Indian political thought'. The reasons for this inadvertence  $-$  or in Parekh's terms, the 'poverty of theory'  $-$  summon future sociology of knowledge type labours. However, some fresh starts in the understanding of state, law and rights were provided by social anthropologists writing in the traditions of thought constituted from M. N. Srinivas to Veena Das. It is another matter that unfortunately Srinivas is all but forgotten; and Das seems to have moved away from her early agendum of serious grappling of these concerns to a mode of understanding that finally relegates 'the discourse of justice and rights' primarily to 'a series of partnerships through which state and community mutually engage in self-creation and maintenance' (Das 2004: 251).

I remain aware that at the very outset the term 'constitutionalism' raises some stunning perplexities. By this notion I wish to simply refer to three intersecting orders of norm and fact: constitutional texts (Cl), constitutional interpretation (C2), and theory or ideology underlying these  $(C3)$ , which I name elsewhere (Baxi 2000a) in terms of the dialectical relation between the three Cs, briefly put as the state of play and war between the normative, institutional, and social movement/struggle types of relationship among the text, interpretation, and theory/ideology. These states of 'play' and 'war' further require us to develop some workable distinctions between – borrowing from Derrida (1992) – the *foundational* and *reiterative* aspects of constitutionalism, or the making of a constitution and its subsequent working. Both offer vast spheres of proliferating narratives. By 'foundational', I signify the myriad exertions of constituent power, the labours of the originary moment, when the contexts and the texts of constitution are composed. Reiterative labours invite attention to the semiotic and the social (that is, material) fact that the composition of the text of the constitution marks the beginnings of all subsequent labours of interpretation and renovation (Baxi 2003: 557, 575–84). Constitutionalism then, in my view, furnishes various sites of labours of production of political and social meanings/significations clustered around four vast thematics: governance, rights, development and justice that address the futures of the 'politics of production' and 'production of politics' (to borrow from Michael Burawoy 1985). Perhaps the notion of labouring practice as defining the realms and tasks of constitutionalism may offer the beginnings of a *materialist theory of constitutionalism* (Baxi 1993).

Doing a materialist interpretation of the act of constitution-making is always a difficult task, as the trend towards archival retrieval of the massive Indian Constituent Assembly Debates  $[CADS]$  – from B. Shiva Rao (1967) and Granville Austin (1966) – already suggests. We also know from recent political science/cultural theory resurgence of interest in the CADS that these are read in terms of who said what and when, not *why* they said what they said and left unsaid what may have been after all more fully said. Thus at best, the CADS narratives exemplify so many forms of objectified and politically commoditized 'dead labour'. The forensic and adjudicatory CADS usages do surely constitute hermeneutic practices of 'living labour'. But in the main, all this presents a master progress narrative, in which the making of India's Constitution furnishes a saga of normative and institutional insurrection against India's co-equally violent colonial and precolonial past. The power of critical acts of reading of the

CADS in the genre of Marxian narratology (e.g. Chaube 1973; Gupta 1979) continues to be negated by the habits of the romantic reading. The current engagement with the CADS now leads to a free-for-all post-ideological type revisitation of the foundational constitutional moment. The CADS are now being read in some post-historic ways; the contexts of high feminist, post-modern, and even ecological critique, uncongenial to the makers of the Constitution, furnish ironic modes of who-said-what-and-why type narrative, interspersed further with ad hoc and exigent commentation from the present whatever standpoint. The new project of reading seeks different understandings of both the constitutional promise and the betrayal, yet at the same moment failing to revisit the constitutional past in terms of grasping the material contradictions. I speak to this with some care in what follows.

The question then arises: What sort of reflexivity may inform diverse acts/practices/ performatives of reading the CADS? May some rather forbidding Hegelian practices of reading universal history wholly inform these? How may we receive in this mode the question of the 'nature' of 'postcolonial reason' as Gayatri Spivak now summons us to fully understand? Do the CADS already mark then the originary moment of 'failed decolonization' and thus provide, as it were, the genetic blueprint for all subsequent progressive postcolonial liberal constitutionalisms? Is the originary moment then fraught with a world-historic significance? Further, how may one relate this sort of reading of the foundational moment to the inaugural postcolonial reading in Gandhi's Hind Swaraj, which radically framed 'Western' parliamentary governance as an aspect of Westoxification and denied the logics of competitive liberal party politics in his later insistence that the Indian National Congress dissolve as a party and convert itself into a people's movement? How may the rhetoric of 'failed decolonization' help us grasp the varieties of Indian socialist, Marxian, and radical humanist thought, which hailed the foundational moment as a truly revolutionary one, in which self-determination signified (in the terms of Antonio Negri 2003) the production of the insurgent 'proletarian' time in confrontation with the 'productive' time of global capitalism? How may we read the Nehruvian imagery of the same originary moment as an aspect of nation-building, that gave us both a just and a strong state (Baxi 1992a)?

Or, may we revisit/resist the CADS in some privileged Walter Benjamin mode approaching history always as radically fragmented, standing always in some redemptive relation with the 'present' and the 'future'? Benjamin presents the originary moment of liberation also as moments of 'horror' (1969: 256–57). No serious reading of the making of the Indian Constitution may escape this 'horror' of the Partition of India. Veena Das captures this moment of horror rather acutely when she asserts that: 'If men emerged from colonial subjugation as autonomous citizens of an independent nation, they emerged simultaneously as monsters' (1997: 86). Yet, most current practices of reading the Debates constructing the collective authorial intent (if such things can ever be), in the main, sanitize the 'horror' simply, and cruelly, as a bygone affair of the 'past', as if of little relevance today. Were we further to note with Benjamin's reading of the 'angel of history' whose face is turned to the past so that he may 'awaken the dead' (1969: 257–58), the question surely arises: What dead do we awaken by our acts of reading the CADS, and with what future specific Indian pertinences? Put another way, how may our acts of reading the CADS revive the 'future memory' (as Benjamin named it) of the foundational moment of several types of suppression: for example, of the militarization of governance and of the early forms of the Hindutva dissidence?

Or, do acts of reading the CADS invite, with Reinhardt Kosselleck, some difficult practices of devising resources for 'timing history' and 'spacing concepts' that trace conceptual and social histories of pre-or proto-constitutional past? Is it the case that the famous Preamble of the Constitution – proclaiming the values of justice, equality, freedom and fraternity – remains merely mimetic of the Euro-American historic pasts, and the languages, of their originary moments? If not, in which future history modes may we read the CADS as offering any disruptive articulations of these very conceptions? Indeed, how may we begin to pursue Kosselleck-type conceptual, semantic and semiotic labours that may ground a distinctive understanding of the perambulatory values?4

Another important question thus emerges: In what ways do the CADS enact exclusions silencing the myriad subaltern voices and instituting a new hegemonic discourse concerning justice/rights? What voices of suffering were silenced, how many registers of insurgencies erased, and what cacophonies of a 'strong' state were thus orchestrated in the making of the Constitution and to what/which future effect? How do we institute careful, responsible, minuscule and fiduciary ways of reading the constitutional past in terms of a present which is not and a future yet to be?

In sum, how may we practice ethically inoffensive readings of the labours of the founding moment and reiterative practices of constitutional development? As I have demonstrated inter alia in my meditations on Jawaharlal Nehru, Mahatma Gandhi and Babasaheb Ambedkar (Baxi 1995, 1992a: 1–10, 226–41), the choice here is indeed difficult. I find myself drawn to the possibility of some sustained Marxian readings that impute the *Debates* with a collective authorial/deliberative intent, which programme and install some mystifying rhetoric universalizing constellations of specific (arid strategically positioned) particular class interests as 'the' public interest or the common good and even managing the self-presentation of the state as 'neutral' and as pro-proletariat (see Gupta 1979; Chaube 1973; Baxi 1993). From this perspective, I miss in these contemporary readings of CADS and the Indian constitutional development a sense of dialectical understanding of the constitutional unfoldment.

Prescinding this, we still need to invent some distinctly postcolonial ways of reading the CADS (cf. Rajan 2003). Is it the case that any such moral reading of constituent labours may suggest a decisive break marking a triumphant normative reversal of mercantilist colonial state formation? If the constitutional Indian state was intended to furnish an assemblage of governance structures and practices outlawing predatory ruling classes who seek to violently appropriate and distribute the resources of the nation among themselves and networks of their artificial affines and kins, it failed (and still continues to fail) even to *name* governance corruption as a distinct violation of its conceptions of human rights and accompanying freedoms. Constitutional conceptions of rights and justice as originally envisioned and still now practiced the enthronement of a predatory and corrupt sovereign. This almost altogether renders conceptions of governance state/regime-oriented, rather than human rights and justice-friendly. The constitution-makers regarded plebiscitary forms of democracy as the primary mechanism, even perhaps the sole one, to ensure both integrity in governance and in the protection and promotion of human rights. No other more specific mechanisms were thought necessary, such as those that would ensure systemic constitutional surveillance over political corruption in high places (Baxi 1990). The constitution-makers did not deploy the foundational moment, outside the badge of probity somehow offered by periodic elections, any salience to the values of transparency in governance. In this,

they continued the colonial inheritance and further innovated new cultures of impunity. In a memorable interview with Andre Malraux, Nehru defined in one sentence the foundational constitutional moment when he said that the postcolonial task was to build a strong state, which pursued the ends of justice. Note that he did not say a strong state that pursued this task with just means.

How, then, may the originary self-presentations of the constitutional Indian state and governance relate to its several reiterative moments? These specific configurations raise all over again the Nehruvian dialectic of the power of justice and justice of power, if one may so put this, posing in turn many an intractable question. All I can say here by way of a prolegomena is that the reiterative discourse manifests the colliding worlds of the material labours of C2, here further revised as connoting the insurgent citizen interpretation of Cl. One hopes for, but rarely finds, any fully-fledged articulation of relationship between rights and justice even in C3. In these multiple universes of these reiterative three Cs the problem emerges more in terms of conflict of rights than directly as the problem of the justice of rights. On the whole, an ongoing constitutional discourse does not engage in providing justifications for enshrining human rights; rather it remains primarily concerned with the nature and number of rights thus enshrined and the permissible modes of the negotiation of their limits. In contrast, the problem of the justice of rights arises for deep and wide deliberation in moments of originary constitution choice-making, that is, making of a new constitution or amending an existing one.

I read the CADS, as early as 1967, as illustrating the vicissitudes of the construction of a 'constitutionally desired just social order'. This was, of course, a wholly pre-Lacanian reading, on my part, of the politics of constitutive desire because it was simply then not available to me! I did not then grasp Lacan's ways of telling stories of desire, constituting always a mobile horizon that marked the impossibility of its attainment, although I was able even then to lisp the disorder of the constituent desire. Perhaps, 'Indian political thought' may then benefit in re-locating the appetites of political desire thriving on the politics of microfascism of governance, contrasted with the 'emancipative' disorder of popular human rights desire within Lacanian grammars. Perhaps, also this may be informed by some revisitation of the classical Buddhist thought concerning the karmic overload of political desires (the maya, sunnyata, and the dukkha of desire as such) (cf. Hallward 2001). I instantly apologize for this heavily rolled-up formulation, but I do think that we ought to grasp constitutionalism as in some sense being passional rather than entirely rational. Constitutionalisms, forever, construct and reconstruct the violent 'orders' of the desiring subjects.

## Innovations: a summary overview

Forms of Indian constitutionalism, especially at some cutting edges of Indian judicial activism …

- i. Creatively modify the classic liberal human rights model into politically inclusive adjudicative, negotiated constitutional secularism.
- ii. Structure extensions of human rights beyond naming organized political community (the state) as the seat and source of human – and human rights – violations to the storehouse, the fons et origio: civil society. (How else may we grasp Article 17 outlawing practices of untouchability, and Article 23 banning practices of agrestic serfdom and related practices of debasing human beings?).

- iii. Assert a progressive role for the law and state in the reform of majority (Hindu) religious practices.
- iv. Enunciate 'near-absolute' rights of minorities to establish and administer educational institutions (Article 30).
- v. Authorize the scope both for runaway practices of political management in devising programmes of affirmative action, while at the same time permitting strict judicial scrutiny.
- vi. Enshrine, irreversibly, some rights of political participation, though the device of legislative reservations for the Scheduled Castes and Tribes, the right to return their own elected representatives to state legislatures and Indian Parliament.
- vii. Renovate judicial review with the daring of enunciative regimes that not merely limit the plenary power of the Indian Parliament to amend the Constitution but also to exercise constituent power, a form where apex justices may even declare a particular amendment constitutionally invalid (Baxi 2003).
- viii. Create a model of fundamental rights forever vulnerable to the creeping imposition of 'reasonable regulation', on constitutionally stated grounds, of these very rights, subject, from time to time, to both the regimes of 'strict' and 'relaxed' judicial review scrutiny.
- ix. Devise constestatory forms of 'cooperative' administrative, fiscal and legislative federalism, always subject to apex judicial interpretation.
- x. Fashion modes of judicial review that legitimate judicial governance via adjudication that contests all forms of executive, legislative and constitutive (in the sense of the Supreme Court's invigilation over the over-reach of the amending power).

Manifestly, some of these features (especially the first eight) constitute a distinctive break with received high colonial legal-liberal inheritance, even when raising in turn a cornucopia of troublesome theory questions. In these, I believe, indwells the originality of the Indian constitutional imagination that also, moreover, contributes in a significant measure a framework for many an Asian and Anglophonic African constitutional design and development.

I recognize at the outset two general questions. First, are there available theories of justice of human rights according to which we may adjudge the justice of constitutional arrangements? Second, were this the case, how may these be made to inform by way of practical or pragmatic reason that finally collapses the 'foundational'/'reiterative' dichotomy (Baxi 2000c)?

## Diversity

Would it be true to say that the making of the Indian Constitution normatively annihilates some orders of civilizational diversity? If so, were the choices thus after all made, just and if so, on whose say-so, and why? How far ought the making of the Indian Constitution have attended to the classical Hindu, Buddhist, Jain, Islamic, Judaic, Parsee, Christian and indigenous civilization traditions in its value aspirations?

How may we speak to the problematic of the Uniform Civil Code (UCC)? The Constitution makes two basic moves: first it manages to preserve the 'personal law system' of Muslim minorities, while, second, it acts (in Marc Galanter's words) as a 'charter of reform' for Hinduism. Clearly, while the first is understandable at the moment of Partition, which jeopardized 'minority' rights, the lack of any movement towards the progressive realization of the promise of UCC, over more than 50 years, raises the question of the constitutional insincerity of the elected public officials and Justices. Prescinding different readings of acts of political expediency, the UCC discourse raises a bouquet of poignant questions concerning the nature and scope of 'minority rights' and their justice qualities: Should the communitarian logics of rights of conscience, religion, and identity justify departures, and even denials, of women's rights as human rights, imperiling in the very process the constitutive ideals of constitutional secularism (see Baxi 2002a: 80-87; 2005b; Menski 2003)?

#### Citizenship

In what ways may we read Indian constitutional development as providing any *just* conceptions of citizenship? Any such conception ought to embrace not just the concept of human beings endowed with human rights but also citizens as bearing human rights responsibilities towards co-citizens (co-nationals) and in certain situations towards noncitizens (non-nationals). Granted that the very notion of 'citizenship' remains no more than just over half a century old in India, how may any understanding of Indian constitutionalism at work in several ways reconcile the libertarian notion of citizenship (a category of rights without responsibilities) with its communitarian reconfiguration in which we may install co-citizen human rights responsibilities? How may we in this context read the 42nd Amendment insinuating Part IV-A (Fundamental Duties of Citizens) as an act redressing the initial failure or as a radical constitutional innovation? In either event, how may courts, citizens and ways of governance capaciously feminize the conceptions of citizenship in ways which abate, frustrate and foil, the social reproduction of what Veena Das names as 'citizen monsters'? Further, and now in a globalizing India, how ought our notions of citizenship inform the new-fangled notions of 'corporate citizenship'?

#### The right to political participation

The constitutional paradigm of the justice of rights, no doubt, richly innovating the classical liberal inheritance, fatefully invents at least three orders of distinction: (1) here-and-now fundamental rights (Part III rights); (2) promises of uncertain futures for social, economic, and cultural rights (Part IV rights and the Directive Principles of State Policy); and, (3) constitutional rights (the rights to citizenship, the right to adult suffrage, the right to trade and commerce throughout the territory of India). How far, and with what democratic justifications may performances of judicial activism mutate these hierarchies of rights? Do these performances contribute at all to any enhanced fulfillment of the Part IV-A charter of the Fundamental Duties of Indian Citizens?<sup>5</sup>

Take, for example, the right to adult suffrage, the cornerstone of democratic India, conventionally understood both as a right to vote as well as to contest elections. Under the constitutional schema, this right is a *constitutional*, not a *fundamental* right. This means that the Indian Parliament may, by a simple majority, change its content and  $\text{scope}$  – and, indeed, the transformations of the Indian Representation of the Peoples Act all too often accomplished this, especially concerning the forms of administrative disenfranchisement through the venality of the preparation of the electoral rolls, or the

difficult judicial monitoring of the muscle and money power in election campaigns, or further through somewhat capricious judicial oversight over the nomination of candidates with a history of criminal indictment. All these arrangements of power raise some basic issues concerning the justice of voting rights, which constitute, when at all, the hinterland of 'Indian political thought'!

What, may we say, are the grounds of the justice of rights to political participation in the Indian Constitution? On the one hand, it proclaims horizontal human rights of citizens in terms of the right to adult suffrage. On the other hand, it also authorizes a system of electoral reservations under which the right to contest elections stands limited by the justice considerations of political participation that entail that certain constituencies may be reserved for the candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Tribes, a time-bound provision initially restricted to the first constitutional decade, and now infinite in duration. How may, incidentally, any approach to the justice of rights justify this infinite reservation? A veteran trade union leader, who then ascended to the status of Indian Presidency, once contended the justice of this provision on the bar of equality rights; the Supreme Court of India negated this claim.<sup>6</sup> On what normative grounds may we then adjudge the resultant situation of the justice of rights? May we attend to this in terms of a justifiable arrangement of group rights trumping individual citizen rights as a mode of historic form of reparative justice? The available Euro-American repertoire of Rawls, and post Rawls, response (see Williams 1995; Thompson 2004) remains unhelpful simply because the forms of legislative reservations, Indian-style, remain rather exotic in their distinctive justice/rights discursivity.

Equally, the ongoing discourse on the multiply aborted constitutional amendments seeking to provide legislative reservations for women in the Indian Parliament and state legislatures raises some serious normative questions (as well as some empirical ones). Ought we, for example, to regard, or relegate, women as identifiable justice constituencies of millennially hurt and harmed constituencies? If so, in what sense may women constitute a class/culture/religion-based 'minority' group/collectivity justified to an order of 'reservation' rights? Does this forever then essentialize this category? Put another way, are *all* women, regardless of their class and history location, to be considered worthy of empowerment through electoral reservations or may we (and if so how) draw some justifiable distinctions across the categories of historically and contemporaneously disempowered women.

## Hierarchies

The complex and contradictory notion of universality, inalienability, indivisibility and interdependence of human rights in sum, the 'community of rights' as Gewirth (1996) enunciates this haunts any agendum contemplating the justice of human rights in Indian constitutional development. The very process of the making of the Indian Constitution frames, as already noted, this agenda via fragmentation of the 'universality etc.' of human rights via the partition enacted by Part III and Part IV. Different approaches to notions of justice have created contested terrains for the scope of constitutionally enunciated human rights and also the scope of justice considerations that may determine state and law based enforcement of constitutionally enshrined human rights.

#### Untouchability

The problem of the justice of rights haunts Indian constitutionalism on several registers. The abolition of 'untouchability' (Article 17 itself puts this term in quotation marks!) is indeed a direct onslaught on the dominant Hindu religious beliefs concerning purity and pollution. Insofar as histories (rather, narratives) can, the history of the nationalist movement had indeed settled the question of the justification of constitutional outlawing of 'untouchability'. What was not settled was the question of how any constitutional imagination may after all address the varieties of 'untouchability'. Because blood secretion was somehow defined as polluting, menstruating women remained 'untouchable'. Contact with a human corpse was similarly viewed as defiling: so was contact with *mlecha*, a foreigner, and by extension visits to a foreign land. The priestly powers, of course, ordained purificatory rites in temporally bound practices of 'untouchability'. The Constitution-makers, wisely but not altogether well, attended only to 'untouchability' arising by birth in certain lower castes. Further, what they perhaps wisely choose to forbid was not religious *belief* but its outward *practice*; the Constitution targets discrimination arising on the ground of 'untouchability'. Spectacularly, also, it provides for equal access of all to Hindu temples (Article 26); this continues even today to raise issues concerning the relationship between state and religion because many Hindu beliefs and traditions (and not just these) practice restrictions on access to the *sanctum sanctorum* in the name of the collective 'right' of the ritually 'pure' religious belief and practice. The Supreme Court of India has indeed inveighed heavily on the exclusion of access by the ritually 'impure' castes to the Hindu temples; it has even ruled that duly qualified non-Brahmins may administer rituals of worship.<sup>7</sup>

# Conscience and conversion

The arena of religious conversion further complicates the multiplex issue concerning the justice of rights. How may the state/law combinatory regime regulate the exercise of the right to conscience when this extends to the practices of both individual and mass (collective) religious conversion? In the abstract, the right to the 'freedom of conscience' may seem to be near-absolute, if only because 'conscience' may not be regulated by expedient acts of sovereign power. But the Indian state/law combine has asserted, and won, the claim to regulate, and even criminalize, conversions by 'force and fraud'.<sup>8</sup>

Article 25 of the Indian Constitution authorizes the state to regulate religious freedom and even the right to conscience on the grounds of public order, health and *morality*. This raises an overarching question: What '*morality*' may justify state power, and legal authority, over the freedom of *conscience*, in its radically ethical sense? What nonagentative ethic may we construct for state/law regulation of conscientious conduct? How may/ought we derive a superior collective ethic that may justifiably regulate, discipline, and punish agnosticism, apostasy, conscientious objection to war-like operations, and religious conversions? Precisely because of this, the question then arises in terms of even practical reason: when may state regulation of religious *belief/practice* be said to violate *the right to conscience?* This is a different question because it is hard to tell when state regulation of *practice* of a religion may in turn profoundly affect or indeed stand apperceived as a sustained assault on religious *belief*. The rarefied world of 'Indian political thought' has done little to foreground this as an affair of political philosophy.

#### 252 Upendra Baxi

#### Minority rights

The practices of identity politics continue to raise vexed questions concerning the 'legitimacy' of the rights assured to 'minority' communities. Many questions of the justice of rights here crowd the discourse. How may the recognition of collective rights extend to justification and endorsement of denial of rights to individual members of a given community? Should individual agency authorize authentic acts of acceptance of denial of rights by individuals thus interpellated within a community? Should we legitimate state coercion that disallows such individual acts constituting a 'waiver' or 'renunciation' of human rights? Does state intervention here reek of flawed state/law moral paternalism, such that may be said to endanger the ethical existence of a moral/ religious community?

Here also we encounter the problematic of a just conceptualization of collectivities, fashioned by social and political histories, as bearers of human rights. What shall we say about the justice-qualities of Indian constitutionalism's penchant for describing these in terms of 'socially and educationally backward classes' and 'other backward classes? What conceptions of secularity stand here entailed? What may we say of the standards of ethical appraisal involved in judgements concerning the 'justice' of affirmative action programmes, Indian style? The discourse raises the question whether we may think of justice as prior to politics or of justice in and through the practices of politics (Williams 1995; Thompson 2004)? How justifiable remain the constitutional choreographies of the politics of identity and difference? In what ways may we understand the forms of the production of textual/sexual constitutional politics?

## **Conclusionary remarks**

There are no easy ways at hand, then, to address (let alone resolve) in the Indian context the justice of rights, especially via a transportation of the messages of the liberal and cosmopolitan approaches to justice (see Chandhoke 1999; Mahajan 1998; Bhargava 1985; Rajan 2003). How may we seek to avoid the imposition of sameness that denies deference to the logics of difference through the strident identification of the 'Indian' with the politically constructed 'Hindu' identity formation? How may we marshal hermeneutic understandings of the Indian traditions (Christian, Buddhist, Judaic, Parsee, Islamic and a thousand-fold variety of Indian indigenous traditions)? Where may we situate the organic knowledges concerning the justice of rights arising from the Old (mostly labour movement histories) and the New Social Movements (in the main, civil and democratic human rights, ecological, gender, identity politics, Ecofeminism movements) on the tableau of the erudite 'Indian political thought'?

Finally, how may we locate, within variegated landscapes of globalization (germinally traced by Arjun Appadurai) any assertion of ontological robustness of 'Indian' thought and praxes, outside its totalizing (and therefore tyrannical and violent) enunciative performances?

## Notes

<sup>1</sup> This is an abridged version of the article that appeared in Vrajendra Raj Mehta and Thomas Pantham (eds) Political Ideas in Modern India: Thematic Explorations (New Delhi: Sage Publications, 2006).