# **CONSTITUTIONAL IDENTITY**

### GARY JEFFREY JACOBSOHN

### **I. INTRODUCTION**

AS constitutions go, India's has been around for a long time. Sixty-four years may not seem so very long—the American counterpart, after all, has been with us for 227 years—but when one considers that the average lifespan of constitutions is nineteen years,  $\frac{1}{2}$  a document that has governed a nation since 1950 may have earned the right to be viewed as durable—perhaps even venerable. If, as this chapter presumes, constitutions possess an identity, the Indian Constitution will have had a longer period of time to acquire and develop one than comparable documents in a clear majority of the world's nations. As we shall see, a constitution's continuity over time is important to the inquiry of this chapter; for the same reason that a person's identity is not fixed in the distinctive makeup of the infant who first emerges from the womb, the identity of a constitution is only imperfectly knowable through the provisions promulgated upon its framing and adoption.

Still, those provisions can hardly be ignored, and indeed they are the most obvious source for commencing an examination of constitutional identity. Even if a document avoids self-identification through explicit textual pronouncement—be it in a preamble or some other declaratory section evidence for establishing a preliminary account of its identity must surely be connected to specific textual commitments, as in the way that a constitution configures its regime of rights. But what if this configuration is not particularly distinctive, such that its resemblance to other constitutions turns out to be more striking than its particularity? For example, in one exhaustive study of the evolution of global constitutionalism it was found that 'constitutions share a substantial and growing generic component … [that] casts doubt upon the notion that constitutions are unique statements of national identity and values'.<sup>2</sup> From this the authors conclude that with respect to the expressive function of constitutions, '[p]erhaps they should be considered expressions not of national identity, but of membership in the global community or a constitutional family'.<sup>3</sup> Or it might even suggest that 'national identity is itself becoming increasingly globalized and less distinctive'. $\frac{4}{3}$ 

Plausible as such inferences might be, they are unsustainable absent a more searching exploration of specific constitutional orders. That the generic component of constitutional development is increasingly evident in linguistic, textual convergence is significant, but in itself it cannot be the basis for denuding constitutions of their particular identities. Hence in what follows I accept Walter Murphy's wise counsel to avoid 'conflating the political values and arrangements under which a people live with the values and arrangements that a constitutional document specifies'. <sup>5</sup> Thus, 'no constitutional document long remains coextensive with the constitutional order'.<sup>6</sup> Or as Andras Sajo has argued, 'The text itself has only limited potential for forging identity. A legally binding document is but a first step on the long and winding road from a political design for collective identity to a socially embedded institution that actually fosters such identity.<sup> $7$ </sup> What is required is some independent empirical demonstration that the text is in fact mainly consistent with constitutional

experience. This argues for withholding judgments about identity until confirmation that the codified rules and principles of the document actually resonate in the practices and culture of the body politic. A constitution's language may indicate a commitment on the part of its authors, and conceivably its subsequent interpreters, to establish a constitutional identity, but until corroborated in the accumulated practice of a constitutional community, the goal, however noble, will remain unfulfilled. Who would say, for example, that the constitutional identity of the former Soviet Union was discernible within the folds of its governing charter?

Drawing upon this more capacious rendering of the constitution, the chapter's first section presents a brief conceptual orientation to the problem of its identity, focusing on its preservative function. A constitution acquires an identity through experience; this identity neither exists as a discrete object of invention, nor as a heavily encrusted essence embedded in a society's culture, requiring only to be discovered. Rather, identity emerges *dialogically* and represents a mix of political aspirations and commitments that are expressive of a nation's past, as well as the determination of those within society who seek in some ways to transcend that past. Yet if this suggests, as it should, a dynamic understanding of constitutional identity, the practical purpose to which the concept is frequently put resisting radical change—entails a more static view that, as will be evident in the Indian case, complicates the task of comprehending its specific meaning.

The idea of constitutional identity has received ample consideration in Indian constitutional jurisprudence. Thus the Supreme Court has been unusually self-conscious in its elaboration of the concept. The Court has done so mainly by developing the controversial doctrine of 'basic structure', in which it has designated a number of constitutional features to be of such importance that it would be prepared to challenge any action perceived as a threat to their existence, including an amendment to the Constitution. On the other hand, there has been less consideration given—among theorists generally and also judges in India—to the concept of identity as a dynamic factor in constitutional development. A theory of constitutional identity that cannot account for significant departures from constitutional continuity is an incomplete theory. What has been said of the identities that make up a nation's social order can be said of its constitutional identity as well:

Collective identities constitute the most basic components of any social order and are products of culture, but they are not fixed social and political variables. They are flexible, oscillating, and changeable, sometimes dramatically and visibly, other times subtly and gradually. They include a wide range of different identities that individuals and collectivities hold simultaneously.<sup>8</sup>

The acuity of this observation is particularly relevant to India, and the second section of the chapter explores its jurisprudential implications in the context of one of the Court's basic structure commitments: secularism.

Whether viewed statically or dynamically, in what respect is it correct to pronounce that in the more than sixty years in which the Indian Constitution has been in existence a clear and unambiguous identity has emerged from the often tumultuous course of that post-Independence history? The final section addresses the uncertainty surrounding this question by focusing briefly on two high-profile controversial cases, the outcomes of which revealingly cast doubt on the reliability of any confident response, leaving us to ponder the still very vexed status of Indian constitutional identity.

## **II. REVOLUTION AND THE CONSTITUTION: STATIC IDENTITY**

'The Constitution is a precious heritage; therefore you cannot destroy its identity.<sup>2</sup> Such was the declaration that accompanied the Indian Supreme Court's reaffirmation of its jurisprudential commitment to the idea that constitutional amendments may be declared unconstitutional. Earlier, in the landmark *Kesavananda* case, <sup>10</sup> the Court had famously asserted its authority to do so when an amendment—even one adopted in full conformity with constitutionally prescribed procedure—was in defiance of the 'basic structure' of the Indian Constitution. Under the theory that *constitutional* change cannot destroy what it modifies, the judgment in effect arrogated to the judiciary a supervisory role over any codified transformation that threatened regime essentials.

Although the assumption of this role can be compellingly told as a story of a beleaguered court's defence of its institutional prerogatives, its broader meaning and significance for Indian constitutional identity will more clearly come into focus if the novel review power is featured within an even more evocative story that one could tell about revolutionary change. In his First Inaugural Address Abraham Lincoln said, 'This country… belongs to the people who inhabit it. Whenever they should grow weary of the existing government, they can exercise their *constitutional* right of amending it, or their *revolutionary* right to dismember or overthrow it.<sup>'11</sup> In effect, what the Supreme Court in India did in the series of cases that extended its review powers beyond the confines of ordinary law was to reject the exercise of the amendment power as a means for accomplishing revolutionary change. Thus, in the sentence preceding the injunction against destroying the Constitution's identity, Chandrachud J wrote: 'Amend as you may even the solemn document which the founding fathers have committed to your care, for you know best the needs of your generation.<sup>'12</sup> His point was Lincolnian: the people who inhabit India are entitled to shape the Constitution in a manner that mirrors their sense of what the changing times require; but to the degree that their efforts become so radical as to eviscerate the very identity of the Constitution, their actions are illegitimate and hence must be resisted. As Madhav Khosla has observed, 'More than a struggle for power, the [basic structure] doctrine represents an effort to distinguish between a constitutional amendment and revolutionary action.<sup> $13$ </sup>

Lincoln and the American experience—in which, it should be said, the idea of an unconstitutional constitutional amendment has never taken hold—was not a direct source of inspiration for Indian jurists. Instead it was Germany—where the Basic Law's explicitly preservative entrenchment provisions had become the touchstone for the post-War Constitutional Court's recognition of its authority to invalidate an identity-nullifying amendment—that figured most prominently in the development of Indian jurisprudence.<sup>14</sup> Designed as a hedge against any retreat from the 'new' Germany to the 'old', the invocation of these 'eternity' provisions came to be regarded as a defining assertion of constitutional identity, as an expression of how at its highest legal competence a postrevolutionary German nation conceived of itself and how it expected to be perceived by others. Indeed, the German interest in the subject of constitutional identity is historically obvious, as would be the interest in the individual identity of anyone who had been close to another whose personality appeared at some point to have drastically changed for the worse. As was said in *Kesavananda*, 'The personality of the Constitution must remain unchanged.<sup>'15</sup>

While the emergence of a nation's constitutional identity may be imbued with revolutionary significance, once established it quite naturally mutates into the focal point for resistance to radical change. '[N]o constitution can contain rules which allow its abolishment altogether; this would permit revolution, whereas it is the very meaning of constitutions to avoid revolutions; and to make them dispensable.<sup>'</sup> <sup>16</sup> But if constitutions do not explicitly contain rules for their own eradication, most do not provide insurance against the possibility of this happening. Germany is the most notable

exception; its eternity clauses are, in Ulrich Preuss's depiction, intended to render revolutions dispensable. Stated differently, its document is structured to prevent a transformation of such principled magnitude that its constitutional identity would become something very different from what it is. The illegitimacy of this negation of constitutional identity is now well recognised in theorising about the subject; thus the repudiation of the founding assertion of identity-instantiating constituent power—a term imbued with both descriptive and normative significance—cannot later be annulled through means of a subsequent amendment. However elevated its legal status may be relative to ordinary law, such formal constitutional modifications are deficient in those attributes that would enable one to equate them with the legitimating authority of the original affirmation of identity.

The framers of India's Constitution did not include eternity clauses in their handiwork, yet they clearly saw themselves as exercising the constituent power of the Indian nation. As formulated by Dietrich Conrad, the relevant question became, '[H]as the original constituent power been spent in the effort, or have the people retained it, to exercise it, if they wish to replace the existing Constitution by a new one? $17$  Conrad's answer is apparent in the Indian Court's amendment jurisprudence. '[A]n ordinary legislative assembly can never be said to exercise the original constituent power.<sup> $18$ </sup> Thus the underlying assumption in these cases is that Parliament's Article 368 amending power is subordinate to the creative authority that first established the Constitution's basic structure. Another way of putting this is that the implicit substantive limits to the amending power are inscribed in constitutional provisions in whose contents are to be found an articulation of a fixed constitutional identity. As Bhikhu Parekh has observed, 'There was an extensive debate … in the Constituent Assembly, resulting in the Indian Constitution, which provides the clearest statement of the country's self-given identity.'<sup>19</sup>

The substance of this articulation is of course contestable, but in addition to the obvious point that controversy will always attend the question of identity, we should consider that judicial reliance on its defensive properties suggests a further supposition that is surely much in doubt, namely that constitutional identity is to be equated with, or confined to, preservative, status quo goals and aspirations. Properly rendered, however, the concept of identity embodies a dynamic dimension that enables it to facilitate as well as hinder dramatic changes in constitutional development. Understandably in Germany viewing identity as fixed and immutable allows one to embrace the appealing logic that preventing things from getting radically better is a price worth paying to ensure that they do not become radically worse. Yet the static position on identity, important as it is, represents only a partial account of the subject. Particularly with reference to the transformational agenda of Indian constitutionalism, it must be accompanied by a more dynamic understanding of the phenomenon.

#### **III. REFORM AND THE CONSTITUTION: DYNAMIC IDENTITY**

To be sure, much of the aspirational content of a nation's specific constitutional identity consists of goals and principles whose permanent and entrenched qualities are shared by other nations, and that are indeed part of a common stock of aspirations we have come to associate more generally with the enterprise of constitutionalism. These aspirations may be described collectively as 'the inner morality of law<sup>2</sup> or the requirements of 'generic constitutionalism<sup>21</sup> implicit in a nation's discourse of justice. Such fixed norms need to be reconciled with the particularistic commitments of local

traditions and practices; the substance of a nation's constitutional identity will to a large extent reflect how the essentials of constitutionalism combine and interact with the attributes of a constitution that are expressive of unique histories and circumstances.

A constitutional amendment may therefore be considered problematic in one of two ways: (i) the change it portends could subvert the fundamentals of constitutional government, at the core of which is the rule of law and the administration of impartial justice; (ii) the change it portends could substantially transform or negate a defining political commitment of the constitutional order that had been central to the nation's self-understanding. The second possibility implicates the distinctive character of a constitution; the first is more consequential as it concerns the realisation of constitutionalism in a given polity.

For example, in India the commitment to secularism can be found, among other places, under the constitutional rubric of basic structure, but so far this judicial placement has not led to any Court decision invalidating an amendment. If such were to occur the Court would doubtless contend that its action was a justifiable defence of constitutional identity, perhaps referencing Khanna J in *Kesavananda*: 'The word "amendment" postulates that the old constitution survives without loss of its identity despite the change and continues even though it has been subjected to alterations.<sup>22</sup> In the case of secularism, however, the identity in question would be very specific to the Indian experience, and for that reason predictably contestable given the competing versions of the concept that have struggled for ascendancy in the course of the nation's history.

On the other hand, where the Indian Court *has* declared an amendment unconstitutional, it has done so in response to egregious political aggrandisement—notably involving Indira Gandhi's efforts to hold on to power—and the perceived threat to the fundamentals of constitutionalism related thereto. The ringing affirmations of the basic structure doctrine in *Indira Gandhi* (1975) and *Minerva Mills* (1980) were occasioned by amendment provisions that, in the opinion of a justice in the first of these cases, offended '[t]he common man's sense of justice'. $\frac{23}{12}$  This was the sense of justice that instinctively triggers resistance to an assault on the very possibility of constitutional government, as opposed to any challenge to its specific variants. 'If by constitutional amendment', wrote another justice in the latter case, 'Parliament were granted unlimited power of amendment, it would cease to be an authority under the Constitution, but would become supreme over it, because it would have power to alter the entire Constitution including its basic structure and even to put an end to it by totally changing its identity.<sup> $24$ </sup> Such invocations, as Khosla has noted, stress 'abstract principles rather than particular provisions',  $\frac{25}{2}$  which is to say they speak to general attributes that we associate with the necessary requirements of governing within constitutional parameters. Or as Edmund Burke said of Warren Hastings' crimes in India, they were 'not against forms, but against those eternal laws of justice, which are our rule and our birthright'.<sup>26</sup>

Once we descend from the more abstract conceptual heights of constitutional identity, we find ourselves in the trenches of a dialogical developmental account that incorporates an easily overlooked feature of the universal constitutional condition, which is that in one way or another all constitutions confront or embody the problem of *disharmony*. Sometimes this condition exists in the form of contradictions and imbalances internal to the constitution itself, and sometimes in the lack of agreement evident in the sharp discontinuities that frame the constitution's relationship to the surrounding society. $27$  The question of identity is prominently implicated in the various permutations of the disharmonic constitution, embodied principally in the determination to eliminate or maintain the discordant aspects of the constitutional predicament. Disharmony is a precondition for change, and

efforts to reduce or defend it reveal that, taken as a whole, constitutional identity is not a static or fixed thing. To apprehend the full complexity of the idea is to see its dynamic quality, which results from the interplay of forces seeking either to introduce greater harmony into the constitutional equation or, contrariwise, to create further disharmony. One could imagine the latter development culminating in a rupture of constitutional continuity, thereby setting in motion a process whose goal might be the reconstituting of the polity.

In relation to India there are two powerful claims on constitutional identity, both firmly rooted in centuries of conflict and contestation. Since Independence one of these claims—for a secular composite culture nation—has been in ascendance, but the other—for a Hindu nation—has influenced the aspirational content of constitutional identity, and at times posed a distinct threat to the hegemony of the predominant view. The identity that has emerged from this extended discordant chronicle reflects the entrenched realities of both visions; the constitutional text embodies them (by no means equally given one side's effective control of the framing process), as does the history of constitutional construction and interpretation. Along the way there have been efforts to reinvent the past, most notably by those determined to create a history expunged of the truths that complicate their ethno/religious story.

Often the debate in India over judicial enforcement of the Basic Structure doctrine concerns its application to the issue of secularism. The Constitution was adopted against a backdrop of sectarian violence that was only the latest chapter in a complex centuries-old story of Hindu–Muslim relations on the Asian subcontinent. Much of that history had been marked by peaceful coexistence; nevertheless, the bloodbath that accompanied Partition reflected ancient contestations and ensured that the goal of communal harmony would be a priority in the constitution-making process. Thus, 'India, with its complex and cross-cutting variations along the lines of religion, language, and caste, is the pre-eminent instance of the use of multicultural policies to maintain democracy and represent culturally inflected interests.'<sup>28</sup>

But it was not the only priority. If not as urgent, then certainly as important, was the goal of social reconstruction, which could not be addressed without constitutional recognition of the State's interest in the 'essentials of religion'. So deep was religion's penetration into the fabric of Indian life, and so historically entwined was it in the configuration of a social structure that was by any reasonable standard grossly unjust, that the framers' hopes for a democratic polity meant that State intervention in the spiritual domain could not be constitutionally foreclosed. As a former Indian Chief Justice has observed, 'The multi-dimensional jurisprudence woven around the Preamble has a revolutionary thrust as it seeks to transform the socio-economic structure of our society.<sup>229</sup> The design for secularism in India required a creative balance between socio-economic reform that could limit religious options and political toleration of diverse religious practices and communal development. Taken together, the ameliorative and communal provisions—often in tension with one another evince a constitutional purpose to address the social conditions of people long burdened by the inequities of religiously inspired hierarchies.

Herein lies the dilemma of Indian constitutional identity. The original vision of the secular constitution had emphasised the rights and sensibilities of religious minorities (especially Muslims), to the point that the secular ideal of religious freedom came to be inscribed, paradoxically, in both the aspiration for a uniform civil code and in the implicit invitation to frustrate its realisation. The constitutive domain of religion is, by the terms of the Constitution, open to encroachment by forces of political and social transformation; but the legitimacy of this undertaking is at least partially dependent on preserving political space for religious identity. If it is indeed the case that a

'revolutionary' mission lies at the core of Indian constitutionalism, then inevitably there will be a tension between that commitment and the promise of continuity that has dominated all reflection on the problem of identity at least since the seventeenth century. What Thomas Reid wrote then of personal identity, that it manifested 'an uninterrupted continuance of existence',  $\frac{30}{30}$  is, as we have seen, applicable to constitutional matters as well. So while the depiction in the landmark *Bommai* case of secularism as 'the soul of the Constitution'<sup>31</sup> was doubtless done without any conscious awareness of the soul's significance for early modern theories of identity, the association calls attention to the fact that the concept of identity is closely allied with the idea of continuity rather than transformation. To the extent, however, that the constitutional 'soul' in India was intended to be ornery—that is to say, confrontational and militant in relation to the social order within which it was embedded—the Indian case presents an interesting challenge to the dominant theory of identity.

Still, it is a less formidable challenge if the fundaments of constitutional identity—most importantly its dynamic aspect—are not overlooked. If continuity—or in Burke's famous account, prescription ('a presumption in favour of any settled scheme of government against any untried project<sup>32</sup>)—is critical for establishing the core of such identity, critical too is the recognition that what is settled is also mutable. At the constitutional level, identity is often shaped through the creative interaction between divergent strands within an extant tradition; thus continuity need not connote internal agreement so much as 'continuities of conflict'<sup>33</sup>—in other words, the dynamic of disharmony. Conflicting and enduring understandings of the constitutional self play off against one another within the circumscribed parameters of the national historical narrative. And so the ameliorative and communal strands within the Indian constitutional firmament represent aspirations that, while in tension with one another, provide a measure of animation to the nation's constitutional identity, and as such defy efforts to sanctify any particular rendering of this identity with the mantle of immutability.

What, then, follows from these reflections on identity? First, constitutional identity can accommodate an aspirational aspect that is at odds with the prevailing condition of the society within which it functions. The idea of the prescriptive constitution might suggest that what is must be (identity as pure discovery), but a strictly positivistic inference need not be drawn from the principle of inheritance. In the case of the framers of India's Constitution, the prevailing social structure, while deeply rooted in centuries of religious and cultural practice, was contestable in accordance with sources from within the Indian tradition that are also a part of its prescriptive Constitution. History revealed disharmony within established traditions and between the dominant strand and society. 'One of the remarkable developments of the present age', wrote Nehru shortly before Independence, 'has been the rediscovery of the past and of the nation.<sup>34</sup> Nehru was one of several delegates at the Constituent Assembly to invoke the name of Ashoka, whose famous edicts have endured as a source of moral and ethical reflection for more than a millennium. Used both as an emulative model for behaviour towards society's destitute and as a basis for criticising the Hindu nationalist rejection of Indian nationhood as rooted in a composite culture, the Ashokan example shows how continuity in the construction of a constitutional identity can draw upon alternative (and even dissenting) sources within one tradition, and then reconstitute them to serve at times as a reproach to other strands (and their societal manifestations) within the same tradition. In other words, it exemplifies 'continuities of conflict'.

A defence of secularism as a central feature of the Indian Constitution's Basic Structure inevitably finds people differing in the meanings they assign to this fundamental commitment. For example, the Hindu Right has often assured Indians that it accepts the constitutional centrality of secularism, which
it embraces as a version of the strict separationist model endorsed by many in the United States, which requires it to oppose Muslim personal law, and which it contrasts with the 'pseudo-secularism' championed by its political opponents.<sup>35</sup> The latter include the Justices on the Supreme Court, most of whom have incorporated the differing perspectives of Gandhi, Nehru, Ambedkar, and others to articulate a uniquely Indian understanding that has been aptly described by Rajeev Bhargava as 'contextual secularism'. At the core of this position is the strategy of 'principled distance', which, according to Bhargava, means that '[T]he State intervenes or refrains from interfering, depending on which of the two better promotes religious liberty and equality of citizenship.<sup>36</sup> Thus the specific forms that secular States take should reflect the particular constitutive features of their respective polities. In India this means (as is so enshrined in the Constitution) that for certain purposes—for example, establishing separate sectarian electorates—the State cannot recognise religion, but for others—for example, establishing a limited regime of personal laws—it may do so. The State need not relate to all religions in the same way; the bottom line, however, is that public policy regarding intervention, non-interference, or equidistance be guided by the same non-sectarian principle of equal dignity for all.

The process by which this concept of secularism emerged as a mark of constitutional identity, then to be extended protected status under the Court's Basic Structure jurisprudence, is roughly analogous to the dialogical formation of personal identity. Much as a self evolves interactively within the specific contours of its environment, India's constitutional identity, as refracted largely through the determinative lens of secularism, is the product of historically conditioned circumstances in which choices are limited by the dual realities of complex communalism and religiously inspired societal inequality. As Anthony Smith has noted, 'The Indian example reveals the importance both of manufactured political identity and of pre-existing ethno-religious ties and symbols from which such an identity can be constructed.<sup>37</sup> The nation as an 'idea of continuity', in which, as Burke said, a constitution discloses itself 'only in a long space of time',  $\frac{38}{3}$  can go far to explain how the main outlines of a secular identity are discoverable as a contingent part of the political and moral order.

## **IV. CONSTITUTIONAL IDENTITYAND THE COURT: THE ELUSIVE PROMISE**

Just as it is tempting to locate constitutional identity in the text of a constitution, it is similarly alluring to imagine finding a definitive articulation of its meaning in the decisions and opinions of the judiciary. As has already been suggested, the text can only provide at best limited service in delivering to us what we desire, much the same as when we look to the judiciary for certain discovery of that elusive object of our interest. The reason for this is only partly accounted for by the wrongness of assuming that the 'constitution is what the Supreme Court says it is'.<sup>39</sup> At least as significant as the acknowledgement of the Court's fallibility is the unyielding fact that its interpretive powers are constrained by the decisions of other institutional actors involved in the writing of a nation's constitutional narrative. Indeed, the absence of monopolistic authority over the shaping of constitutional identity is amply illustrated in Indian politics and jurisprudence. As is shown in the following brief discussion of two landmark court cases, the ambiguity that surrounds the portrayal of Indian constitutional identity is to a large degree attributable to the nation's indeterminate path of post-judicial developments.

## **1. Identity and the Vagaries of Ordinary Politics**

As Sanjay G Reddy has noted, 'India's public institutions function in the context of a "long democratic revolution".<sup>240</sup> Among other things, this means that the well-known description of the judiciary as an 'arm of the social revolution' $\frac{41}{1}$  should not convey a sense that the courts in India, even when they have arguably acted in conformity with this expectation, have had a revolutionary impact on the nation's development. That the attainment of a democratic revolution was a major component in the vision animating many of the framers of the Constitution is undeniable and abundantly manifest in some key provisions in the document they cobbled together. Even as an unfulfilled aspiration it must be considered highly germane to any assessment of Indian constitutional identity; $\frac{42}{1}$  its fulfilment would remove any tentativeness from an assessment of its relevance.

The case of *SR Bommai v Union of India* is known for many things, not the least of which are its signal contributions to discussions of emergency power, federalism, and secularism. Of course, all of these subjects pertain to the question of identity, but there is an aspect of that case that is particularly illuminating, specifically of the ways in which a juri-centric understanding of the entrenchment of Indian constitutional identity must be considered problematic. Much like the United States Supreme Court's decision in *Brown v Board of Education*, <sup>43</sup> where the congealing of racial equality into the core of American constitutional identity occurred only in the wake of legislative and executive actions flowing from that landmark case, the ultimate significance of *Bommai* rests not so much in the folds of that decision as in political developments that could emanate from its holding. Thus the Court pointed out, 'The Indian Constitution is both a legal and social document. It provides a machinery for the governance of the country. It also contains the ideals expected by the nation. The political machinery created by the Constitution is a means to the achieving of this ideal.<sup> $44$ </sup>

Inherent in the Indian constitutional condition is a plainly articulated gap between foundational ideals and existing realities; the question is whether the radical disharmony between law and society establishes a constitutional obligation for the State to resolve the most severe of these contradictions. Arguably, this obligation is inscribed in the Constitution in several ways, including the various invitations extended to the State to regulate religious practices in the interest of social welfare and equality. The most visible constitutional expression of the aspirations that stamped the document with a distinctive identity is to be found in **Part IV**, the Directive Principles of State Policy. The provisions contained in this section are not enforceable by the judiciary, but, as stated in Article 37, 'the principles therein laid down are nevertheless fundamental in the governance of the country and it shall be the duty of the State to apply these principles in making laws'. As has been noted with only slight exaggeration, the 'Directive Principles of State Policy constitute the soul, the very spirit of the ethos of the Constitution. These principles are the epitomes of social policy whereupon the State has been enjoined to embark on the goals of distributive justice.<sup> $3\frac{45}{5}$ </sup>

Earlier, we saw how in *Kesavananda* the Supreme Court invoked basic structure as a defensive move to preserve what it designated as the Constitution's identity. On paper, at least, this breakthrough was enough to vault the Court to the forefront of the world's most activist judiciaries. But precisely because *Kesavananda* was not about ordinary politics, the actual impact of basic structure jurisprudence was likely to be experienced more symbolically than tangibly. *Bommai* adapted the doctrine for application to the politics of day-to-day governance, establishing it not only as a standard against which the Court could judge the constitutionality of others' actions, but also as a potential touchstone for directing the course of actions not yet taken. The great challenge of Indian constitutionalism is to deliver on the promise of its transformative aspirations. That arguably requires a Court performing more ambitiously than in the familiar naysayer role of the orthodox judicial review model, but also one attuned to the limitations of judicial power and the hollowness that is so often the fate of the more grandiose hopes for judicial interventions in policymaking.

The principal result in *Bommai* was the approval given to the dismissal of three elected State governments deeply implicated in the violence associated with the destruction of a mosque. Yet the broader meaning of the decision may be found in the connection drawn in some of the opinions between the basic structure doctrine—specifically as it relates to secularism—and the responsibility of the Union government to advance the constitutional essentials of the polity. Thus the immediate consequence of the ruling was to affirm the Centre's finding of a 'failure of constitutional machinery' in the States; more interesting were the long-term possibilities: that the Indian political system had a positive responsibility to abide by the spirit of the Constitution, that the Directive Principles of State Policy would henceforth be imbued with more than hortatory significance. As SP Sathe wrote, '[F]or the first time the Supreme Court used secularism as a reference for judging the validity of State action.'<sup>46</sup>

The development of constitutional identity may thus be conceptualised as a maturation process involving ongoing interactions among multiple actors operating within the parameters of text and history. Of the Constitution, Reddy J noted in *Bommai*, '[I]ts material provisions are inspired by the concept of secularism. When it promised all the citizens of India that the aim of the Constitution is to establish socio-economic justice, it placed before the country as a whole, the ideal of a welfare state.<sup>'47</sup> India's Constitution is explicitly and implicitly an affirmative action constitution. By invoking the basic structure doctrine in support of the national government's dismissals of State governments for their derelictions of duty, the Court in effect was liberating the Centre to be a proactive player in fulfilling the aspirations that it, the Court, had certified as high-priority goals. Of course, the attainment of these goals will depend on whether the government in New Delhi is sympathetic to this constitutional agenda; moreover, yet to be determined is whether the Court will require it to be sympathetic. If it does, then the familiar doctrine of affirmative constitutional obligations will have been ratcheted up significantly. In this Indian incarnation it will mean that governments, even those that may not have been complicit in actively working to undermine constitutional provisions, will be required to expend resources to advance ends whose fulfilment the Court designates as necessary to further constitutional identity. The likely resistance to such an order could precipitate a constitutional crisis, which is one reason to think the Court will be reluctant to push the envelope very far.

## **2. The Meandering Path of Identity**

The forging of constitutional identity is not a preordained process in which one comes to recognise in the distinctive features that mark a constitution as one thing rather than another the ineluctable extension of some core essence that at its root is unchangeable. The disharmonies of constitutional law and politics ensure that a nation's constitution—a term that incorporates more than the specific document itself—may come to mean quite different things, even as these alternative possibilities retain identifiable characteristics enabling us to perceive fundamental continuities persisting through any given regime transformation.

In 2009, the High Court of Delhi decided a case that very quickly came to be seen as emblematic of Indian constitutional identity, but whose overturning a few years later by a two-judge bench of the Supreme Court cannot but cast doubt upon the stability of such a reading. In *Naz Foundation v* Government of India, <sup>48</sup> the lower court declared unconstitutional a long-standing provision of the Indian Penal Code that had criminalised 'unnatural' consensual sexual acts between consenting adults in private; that is, homosexual conduct. $\frac{49}{2}$  The Court fashioned a constitutional right of privacy largely out of materials appropriated from abroad, with copious references to American precedents. The Indian judges saw themselves as defending 'a constitutional morality derived from constitutional values', and they embraced the teaching of BR Ambedkar, who had said at the Constituent Assembly: '[I]t is perfectly possible to pervert the Constitution, without changing its form by merely changing its form of administration and to make it inconsistent and opposed to the spirit of the Constitution.<sup>50</sup> But these judges failed to elucidate the relevance of the many pages of their opinion devoted to *other* peoples' constitutions for maintaining the spirit of *their* constitution.

Fortunately, others have provided explanations. Sujit Choudhry, for example, persuasively argues that 'the missing link between the comparative jurisprudence on same-sex rights and the basic premises of the Indian Constitution is the analogy between sexual orientation and untouchability'.<sup>51</sup> He points out that the judgment's invocation of the ideals animating the adoption of the Indian Constitution, in particular the intention to advance a 'social revolution', provided the broader context within which the criminalisation of same-sex relations was assessed. The Court explicitly appealed to Nehru's passionate devotion to the constitutional goal of inclusiveness; in addition, Choudhry reveals that what was not explicit in the text of the opinion—a specific reliance on the South African judiciary's linkage of discrimination based on caste and sexual orientation—played an important role in the outcome of the case in India. 'The idea of a constitution as a dynamic, evolving instrument of social change is arguably the principal influence of the Indian constitutional experience  $\ldots$  <sup>52</sup> In this account, the Delhi High Court ruling is an embodiment of the identity-marking commitment to 'transformative constitutionalism'. And so, '*Naz Foundation* demonstrates that under the dialogical model, comparative materials can be used in a way that not only acknowledges, but also affirms, a distinct constitutional identity.<sup>'53</sup>

Four years later, however, this affirmation was in effect challenged, if not rejected, when the Supreme Court overturned the decision in *Naz Foundation.* The reversal was obviously a major disappointment to those who had been encouraged by the lower court's ringing endorsement of a progressively inclusive political community, but also to anyone expecting to find in the opinion of the three-judge panel an engagement with the substantive arguments in the nullified judgment. Still, the Court's ruling in *Suresh Kumar Koushal v Naz Foundation* rested on two related arguments about judicial power that are important to this chapter's consideration of Indian constitutional identity: the sanctity of the 'principle of presumption of constitutionality' $\frac{54}{2}$  and the impropriety of 'extensively rel[ying] upon the judgments of other jurisdictions'. $55$ 

Clearly, these jurisprudential commitments are a direct repudiation of the idea that the Court is 'an arm of the social revolution'. Also manifest in the deference to Parliament as the source for legitimate expression of the indigenous will of the people is the presumption that determining the nation's constitutional identity is not to be achieved through the imposition of the judicial will. Thus even if we assume that inclusiveness is one of the essentials of Indian constitutionalism and that an extensive documentary record is supportive of such an assumption, the dynamic quality of identity and the dialogical process by which it emerges mean that the nature and boundaries of the inclusive constitutional ethos is embedded in a deep cultural matrix from which counter-pressures to the dominant creed exert a continuing, if irregular, force seeking a more favourable standing for a less inclusive identity reflective of vital strands within the nation's Hindu and Muslim traditions.

Taken together, then, the two decisions offer a window into the development of constitutional identity in India. The ruling by the Delhi High Court did not culminate in a definitive statement of identity, as was made clear by the Supreme Court's subsequent decision to transfer the struggle over same-sex rights from the judicial arena to that of the legislature. Thus, the episodic and untidy process of defining constitutional identity, with its thrusting and counter-thrusting in and out of courtrooms, will proceed in tandem with the evident disharmony between aspirations and behaviour, and with the uncertainty that accompanies a progression whose end-point is necessarily elusive. A pivotal idea of this chapter has been that disharmony, whether manifest in the incongruities lodged within a constitution, or in the gap between inscribed commitments and external realities, is the main impulse behind the shaping of constitutional identity. Yet to understand how it works requires serious engagement with sources from within the traditions of a polity that extend much further back in time than the occasions that trigger the impulse. Therefore, while the Indian Constitution, as framed and amended, is permeated by a transformative ethos that establishes a radically egalitarian playing field upon which a constitutional identity is to be constructed, the document also expresses in more muted fashion an exclusivist voice with deep resonance in the history of the subcontinent. The interactive process intrinsic to a constitutional work in progress ensures that the outcome in *Koushal* will not be the final word on its subject, or for that matter on the bigger idea of identity to which it is connected.

## **V. CONCLUSION**

A constitution is a large piece of a nation's constitutional identity, but it is not coterminous with it. In most cases it lays down key markers of that identity, then to be adapted to changing political and social realities in ways that modify, clarify, or reinforce it through the dialogical engagement of various public and private sources of influence and power. As suggested at the outset, until a convergence is apparent between constitutional rules and principles on the one hand and actual constitutional practices on the other, one would be well advised to withhold definitive conclusions about a nation's constitutional identity.

Circumspection in this regard is particularly warranted in India, where the question of identity is so closely linked with transformative aspirations. The very notion of a confrontational constitution hints at the magnitude and daunting nature of the challenge of reconstruction; what an Indian jurist once called a 'militant environment'<sup>56</sup> is unlikely passively to submit to the transformative designs of a hostile constitution. For that reason, the success of such a constitution in delivering on its promise of radical change is by no means assured. Indeed, the one explicit mention of revolution in the Indian Constitution is quite revealing in this respect. It appears in the Statement of Objects and Reasons that serves as a preamble to the Forty-Second Amendment adopted in 1976. 'The question of amending the Constitution for removing the difficulties which have arisen in achieving the objective of socioeconomic revolution… has been engaging the active attention of Government and the public for some years now.' The response: dramatically increase the powers of the government while diminishing the authority of the judiciary.

In invoking the radical design behind the document, the amendment reflects an accurate rendering

of original constitutional aspiration—at least the dominant view—but also the enormous challenge of delivering on its promise. What is more, the dubious auspices under which the constitutional course correction was arranged—the emergency government of Indira Gandhi—suggest that there may be a heavy price to pay for seeking fulfilment of the redemptive ambitions of political leaders. More generally, the Indian example suggests a larger point about constitutional identity and change, namely that aspirational considerations necessarily entail a high measure of uncertainty in establishing their ultimate transformative significance.

This uncertainty is also, as we have seen, inextricably tied to a constitutional commitment—to social tradition and communal integrity—that has always coexisted uneasily with constitutive transformative aspirations. As perhaps most poignantly illustrated in the famous *Shah Bano* case <sup>57</sup> in which the decision by the Supreme Court to override Muslim personal law in favour of a section of the criminal code precipitated a massive political backlash that culminated in the adoption of legislation denying divorced Muslim women maintenance rights under the law—the goal of societal reconstruction along egalitarian lines is easier inscribed than achieved. The story in this instance was one of 'gender justice ... rendered hostage to community identity'.<sup>58</sup> But the broader implication of the case and its aftermath is this: that so long as communal identities remain a salient and entrenched feature of the Indian social scene, and so long as these identities continue to draw upon the ample resources of the local constitutional tradition, any depiction of Indian constitutional identity will need to accept the inevitability of flux and ambiguity.

Finally, we must appreciate that constitutional democracy incorporates a commitment that necessarily muddies the waters of identity: democracy. Elections matter, particularly those having dialogical implications for the adjustments and modifications that accompany the progression of a nation's constitutional identity. Whether, for example, the outcome in the 2014 elections in India 'entails nothing short of an attempt to roll back the long social revolution that has been effected in this country over the last one hundred years<sup> $59$ </sup> remains to be seen. Still, such speculation about a social counter-revolution reminds us that commitments widely imagined as firmly entrenched—even those displaying the markings of constitutional inscription—possess a more contingent quality than may commonly be assumed. This, of course, does not mean that the substance of constitutional identities tracks the vagaries of electoral politics; indeed, with regard to those constitutional essentials that represent the necessary, if not sufficient, elements of the totality of constitutional identity they should have little, if any, determinative impact. In relation, however, to the dynamic components of identity, those making up the core of the expressive function of a constitution, a major displacement in political power can affect the relative standing of competing strands within the disharmonic constitutional order, and thus the shape of constitutional identity. Such is certainly the case in the world's largest constitutional democracy.

<sup>1</sup> Zachary Elkins, Tom Ginsburg, and James Melton, *The Endurance of National Constitutions* (Cambridge University Press 2009) 129. Of India the authors write, 'According to the predictions of our epidemiological model, India's framers have built a document to last generations': [ibid](#page-12-0) 151.

<span id="page-12-1"></span> $2$  David S Law and Mila Versteeg, 'The Evolution and Ideology of Global Constitutionalism' (2011) 99 California Law Review 1163, 1243.

<span id="page-12-0"></span> $3$  Law a[n](#page-12-1)d Versteeg  $(n 2)$  1244.

 $4$  Law a[n](#page-12-1)d Versteeg  $(n 2)$  1244.

<sup>5</sup> Walter F Murphy, *Constitutional Democracy: Creating and Maintaining a Just Political Order* (Johns Hopkins University Press 2007) 13.