## Chapter 5

# Tribal Movements: Rethinking in a Comparative Perspective

Tribal movements have been one of the most extensively studied developments in tribal studies. What accounts for this focus is the pervasiveness of tribal people's resistance against alien forces ever since they came under British rule and administration. Raghavaiah has made a chronological list of 70 'tribal revolts' from 1778 to 1971 (Raghavaiah 1979). A survey of tribal movements conducted by the Anthropological Survey of India has identified 46 tribal movements in India during 1976–77 (Singh 1993). As early as 1945, *Man in India*, an anthropological journal, brought out a special number on tribal rebellions. This chapter examines the salient features of studies of tribal movements and critiques some prevailing ideas on tribal movements in sociological and social anthropological literature.

Most studies of tribal movements are in the nature of ethnographic accounts. Hence, studies have tended to be mostly descriptive rather than analytical. These studies have led to certain kinds of broad generalizations. For example, tribal movements have been, by and large, associated with tribes that are numerically large and relatively advanced. The relatively advanced tribes are associated with tribal groups that make their living from agriculture, especially settled agriculture. Conversely, it is held that small, isolated, and primitive tribes have little potential for launching and sustaining a movement. At best, they are expected to react to issues over land and forests on which they are greatly dependent for their livelihood (Singh 1982). Tribal movements have also been characterized as spontaneous events, thereby lacking organizational structure. Hence, attempts have been made to show the existence of organization in such movements (Guha 1983). Others have pointed to tribal social and political

structures as the key elements of the organizational structure of tribal movements (Shah 1990).

One of the concerns in the study of tribal movements in India has been to provide a system of classification. To construct a typology of such diverse social movements is a difficult task. Generally, the movements have been classified keeping in mind geographical and/or chronological factors. Hence, they have been classified as region-specific, such as those of northeastern India, eastern India, central India, etc., or on the basis of chronology, as those of the pre-independence and the post-independence periods. Movements have also been classified on the basis of their objectives and aims as revolts, rebellions, reform movements, insurrections, etc. On the basis of ideology, movements have been classified either as conservative and reactionary or as progressive and revolutionary (Shah 1990; Fuchs 1965; Mahapatra 1972). The most common way of classifying movements has been on the basis of issues, such as forest, land, ethnicity, culture, identity, political autonomy, social mobility, etc. There is a broad agreement among scholars over employing such a system of classification for tribal movements. However, such a system of classification in tribal contexts is far from neat, and often overlaps with other issues. The classifications thus reflect more of the dominant themes and/or issues underlying the movements. With regard to movements broadly described as pertaining to the cultural domain, there are various interpretations. Whereas Singh (1983, 1993) uses the terms 'Sanskritization' and 'cultural' to describe such movements depending on the overall thrust, Sinha (1972) employs the term 'reform' in place of 'Sanskritization' and 'ethnicity' in place of 'cultural' to refer such movements.

### Early Tribal Struggles

Tribal struggles of one type or another continued all through the colonial period. However, it has been difficult to fit the early tribal struggles into any of the types mentioned above. Tribal struggles of the colonial period have come to be described more on the basis of their character than on the basis of the issues on which they were based. Indeed, the issues were too fuzzy to be clearly conceptualized. Thus, struggles dating from this period have been commonly described as revolts, rebellions, or insurrections. At times, they

have been described in terms of messianic or millenarian movements. Such descriptions tend to emphasize the fact that the early tribal struggles had more to do with the issue of colonial rule and administration. Hence, it would not be incorrect to describe these early struggles as struggles for autonomy of a certain kind. Of course, the demand for autonomy articulated in the post-independence period has been different in a very substantive sense from the issues that provoked the struggles of the British period. Yet there was an overlapping, at least in the spirit if not in the letter, as may be inferred from the way in which the early struggles were described by the colonial administration. The terms commonly used to describe these struggles were revolt, resistance, and insurrection. Even scholarly historical works adhere to such descriptions. An interesting aspect of the tribal struggles of the period is that in the postcolonial official history of India, these have come to be seen as a part of the freedom struggle, thus equating the struggles of the tribes with the struggles of the non-tribes against British rule. In the process, what is often forgotten is that the tribal struggles were not only against the British but also against non-tribal people, who in turn were engaged in a struggle against the British. The non-tribals were invariably seen as people who took advantage of the administrative and other structures created by the British and who evicted tribes from their lands and deprived them of their resources through fraud, coercion, and debt bondage. In fact, tribal struggles were fought against non-tribal people far more intensely, as they were seen to be the immediate exploiters and oppressors of tribal people.

## Sanskritization Movement

Colonial rule and administration became deeply entrenched in tribal areas after the failure of the early struggles to replace existing arrangements. This led to an unprecedented expansion of roads, railways, and other means of communication, which further opened up the space for an influx of people from outside into the tribal areas. The alienation of land from tribes to nontribes continued unabated. However, the initial shock that they had suffered had been absorbed by now. There was now greater communication and interaction between tribes and non-tribes. The non-tribals were now seen as people who occupied positions of power and influence, and hence were

superior to the tribals. The non-tribals looked down on the tribals and criticized the latter's way of life and values. The result was that the tribals began to emulate the way of life and values of the non-tribals. This process has been referred to as Sanskritization in social anthropological literature. In due course, the urge to emulate became so strong that it took the form of movements that have been described as Sanskritization or social mobility movements. The origins of these movements can be traced to the beginning of the twentieth century; they gained momentum in the 1920s and 1930s. The movements went by different names in different regions and among different tribes. Thus, in Gujarat, the movement was popularly known as the Devi movement (Hardiman 1987). Among the Oraons of Chotanagpur, it was called the Tana Bhagat movement (Ekka 1972, 2003; Sachchidananda 1978). Among the Hos and the Santhals, it was known as the Haribaba and the Sapha Hor movements respectively (Ekka 2003; Singh 1992; Areeparampil 1993). Yet these movements were strikingly similar in many ways, and hence are commonly known as the Bhagat movements. The Bhagat movements have also been widespread among many tribes in central and western India (Bhatt 1983; Danda 1983; Mann 1983; Lal 1983).

Those who regard such movements as evidence of Sanskritization view these primarily as evidence of attempts to increase social mobility. Indeed, the two terms have been used almost interchangeably. Many scholars have taken this line. To my mind, however, the movements are is imbued not so much by the desire for social mobility as by the desire to gain respectability in the eyes of the larger society. This is, of course, not to deny the linkage between Sanskritization and social mobility. However, where this has been so, it has been more of a political than a cultural movement. That is, Sanskritization as a cultural process may have been at work among the tribes but it is not linked to issues of social mobility. In fact, the open articulation of social mobility has been made only in areas where the Sanskritization process has already taken place widely. Among members of such groups, there has been a widespread movement for the recognition of a higher status, such as Kshatriya status. Since such articulations have often been in the form of demands for their enumeration as Kshatriya in the census or official records, the movement assumes a political rather than a cultural form. The cases of the Kudmi Mahtos of Jharkhand and the Koch

Rajbongshis of Assam and northern Bengal are illustrative of this phenomenon (Singh 1983; Basu 2003).

There is no doubt that such movements have been active vehicles for Sanskritization. However, to describe them merely as that would be an over- simplification. Rather, these movements are more in the nature of a critique of their society. After all, tribes have been steadily losing control over their land and other resources, and they have had to face extreme exploitation. Although they have resisted these conditions from time to time through armed revolt, they have been unsuccessful in changing their current circumstances. They have failed to redress their grievances through legal action not only because the courts are located far away from the places where they live, but also because the entire legal process, including the attitude of the functionaries of the court, is hostile to them. Hence, tribals have sought a solution to their problems by directing attention towards their own societies. That is, they have sought a solution not in terms of changing the relations between tribes and non-tribes but by initiating change within their own societies. The movements have been directed primarily at reforming the inner workings of their own societies, including their religions since religion is intimately related with their social structure (Ekka 1972, 2003; Sachchidananda 1978; Hardiman 1987).

Tribal religion has many spirits, both benevolent and malevolent, which are invariably treated as the custodians of the peoples' well-being. However, neither benevolent nor malevolent spirits, despite the prayers and sacrifices offered to them, had succeeded in protecting the tribes from the suffering and misery that had befallen them since the inception of British rule. That explains why the reform or revitalization movements came to focus on religion. This proceeded in two directions. The first was an increasing trend of replacing tribal gods and spirits with the gods and deities of more powerful religions, especially Hinduism and Christianity. The second was increasing pressure to return to the original form of tribal religion. This meant reverting to the one supreme god whom they worshipped in their traditional religion (Ekka 1972, 2003; Mahapatra 1972). The principal aim of these reform or revitalization movements was to purge tribal society of those elements that provoked the scorn and disdain of the larger society. They were also imbued by prophetic visions of ushering in a

new social order. Although purificatory in nature, they were also expressions of protest and rebellion against the colonial rulers and their allies, such as zamindars. The movements encouraged non-payment of revenue, rent, and tax, and a withdrawal from forced labour. This is seen most clearly in the Tana Bhagat movement among the Oraons, the Devi movement among the tribes of south Gujarat, and the Haribaba movement among the Hos (Ekka 2003; Hardiman 1987; Areeparampil 1993; Singh 1992).

Again, there is no denying the fact that some movements have been overwhelmingly driven by the ethos of Sanskritization. The same could not be said, however, of such movements as a whole. Indeed, many such movements, though apparently characterized by features resembling those of the Sanskritization process, were, in fact, driven more by a desire to reform tribal society so as to be able to withstand the forces of change rather than through Sanskritization or emulation, as argued by many scholars. That is, there were other discernible strands in such movements reform and ethnicity being the two major ones (Ekka 1972, 2003). Indeed, the three stands—Sanskritization, reform, and ethnicity—overlap a great deal with each other. Hence, the description of such movements as being driven only by Sanskritization glosses over other important dimensions.

## Cultural and Identity Movements

There is some confusion about the cultural dimension of tribal movements, with the movements being linked to the Sanskritization process, namely the Bhagat movement. However, in a very substantive sense, the Bhagat movement is antithetical to the Sanskritization process, for the aim of the former is to revitalize tribal society, which has experienced many kinds of changes resulting from contact with the outside world. The aim of the Bhagat movement is to restore the original status and distinctive features of tribal societies lost because of the influence of Sanskritization. Hence, it is a reform movement aimed at restoring tribal society to its pristine state, that is, an attempt to go back to the original tribal religions, social customs, practices, and values. For example, some tribes like the Santhals, the Hos, and the Oraons attempted to return to pre-Hindu and pre-Bhagat forms of tribal religion. These attempts are known by different names, such as the

Sarna Dharam, the Sari Dharam, and the Adi Samaj movements. These are described as revitalization movements in the anthropological literature. Examples are the Adi Samaj movement initiated by Lakhi Bodra, Dupud Dharam, and others among the Hos and the movement initiated by Raghunath Murmu among the Santhals (Areeparampil 1993; Mahapatra 1983). Revitalization movements are also found among some tribal groups in the north-eastern region. The most notable among these are the Seng Khasi movement among the Khasis and the Zeliangrong movement among the Zemeis, the Liangmeis, and the Rongmeis Nagas (Kabui 1982; Natarajan 1982).

In such movements, the question of identity is brought to the forefront. The issue of identity, which had been dormant in earlier tribal movements, has added a new dimension to tribal movements. Identity issues have been articulated in both cultural and political terms.

Indeed, political issues have been instrumental in the rise of autonomy movements among different tribal groups in India. However, even where they enjoy autonomy in the form of a separate state, the issue of identity articulation continues to be important. In tribal states or regions where the non-tribal population is large and where the steady inflow of non-tribal population continues, the issue of tribal identity has been sharply articulated. This is the case in north-eastern India (Kumar 2005). In the tribal state of Meghalaya, there was recurrent tension in the recent past between tribals and non-tribals over the issue of identity. The fear of being reduced to a minority in their own land was intensely articulated. In short, the articulation of identity has been taking place on two planes—political and cultural. The former is an external articulation of identity since it hinges primarily on tribal*–*non-tribal relations. The latter is an internal articulation of identity. Nevertheless, the two kinds of articulations are linked with each other. In the north-east, the identity issue is more of a political than a cultural articulation as the cultural distinctiveness of tribal groups has never been at stake. When it has been at stake, it has provoked a demand for a separate hill state. In contrast, the cultural distinctiveness of tribal groups has been eroded as the result of increased contact with the larger Indian society. The erosion became intense and widespread with the consolidation of British rule. Hence, the demand to return to their cultural roots has been

articulated with the aim of asserting their distinct and separate identity. The means through which this goal was achieved took a predominantly cultural rather than a political turn.

#### Land- and Forest-based Movements

Land- and forest-based movements historically have been more widespread in eastern, central, and western India. In southern India, such movements have been a recent phenomenon. The land and forest movement waged by the Adivasi Gotra Samaj in Kerala under the leadership of Janu has received wide attention. In north-eastern India, such movements, excepting those in the plains areas have been rare. This is mainly because of the control that the tribals still enjoy over land and forests, especially in the hill region. The same has not been the case in the plains.

Discontent over land and forest issues among the tribals began with the coming of British rule. The British introduced new policies and administrative arrangements in the tribal areas. Side by side, the region was also opened to market forces. All these changes led to loss of control over land by the tribals. At the same time, restrictions were imposed on the use of forest resources, which caused widespread resentment against British rule and the aliens who had appropriated the resources of the tribals. The tribal revolts or rebellions that occurred throughout the nineteenth and the early twentieth centuries were fuelled mainly by these grievances. These grievances, however, did not acquire the form of a land- or forest-based movement as the issues were closely connected with the overall social destabilization brought about by colonial rule and alien administration. Since those who had usurped tribal land were outsiders (*diku*s), including British administrators, the movement took the form of a revolt against British rule and the outsiders, especially landlords, moneylenders, and traders. Prominent among these movements were the Kol insurrection, the Bhumij revolt, the Santhal rebellion, the Kherwar movement, and the Birsa movement. After these initial outbursts, there was a lull in the articulation of discontent. Even if popular outbursts did take place, these got tagged, and even became secondary to the reform movement witnessed by tribal society during this period. Such movements have been referred to as the Bhagat movements in the anthropological literature, as noted earlier.

However, as the Indian national movement gained momentum, agrarian and forest issues came to the forefront among the tribes, but this time with a difference. The movements now were part of the larger movements of civil disobedience and non-cooperation launched by the Congress and other nationalist leaders. Agrarian movements during the larger national struggle not only took the form of the non-cooperation and civil disobedience movements against the colonial state but also struggles against exploitation and oppression by landlords. The latter, both in the colonial and postcolonial periods, were mobilized primarily by left-wing political parties. The broad aims of such struggles were security of tenure, reduction of rent, increased share of produce, etc. In these struggles, tribals aligned with other exploited classes of agrarian society (Sen 1972, 1982; Singh 1983; Dhanagare 1983). Agrarian-based movements in post-independence India also assumed the form of forcible harvesting of crops (on lands that once belonged to tribals, but which had been taken away from them through fraudulent means), repudiation of debts, and implementation of the prescribed minimum wage. Such struggles were directed against moneylenders and landlords, and were widespread in parts of eastern and western India in the 1960s and 1970s (Iyer and Maharaj 1986; Adhikary and Bhattacharya 1983; Kulkarni 1983).

The large majority of tribes in India are dependent on agriculture for their livelihood. Hence, it is generally argued that those practising settled agriculture are no different from the neighbouring non-tribal peasants. Hence, many scholars treat tribal movements as peasant movements. Peasant leaders too have described them as aboriginal kisans. Such an approach, however, tends to gloss over the diversities of tribal social formations of which tribal movements have been a part. The patterns of leadership and political mobilization among the tribes differ from those found among peasants. The difference is attributed to the characteristic features of tribal society, such as physical or geographical concentration in certain areas, social and political organization, and relative isolation from the so-called mainstream. Tribal movements are also seen as being different from peasant movements in the sense that tribal movements are both land and forest based. Tribal movements also exhibit a greater sense of community consciousness (Singh 1983).

In studies of land- and forest-based movements, tribes have invariably been treated mostly as peasants and forest dwellers. Their concerns have been addressed exclusively in terms of securing their economic livelihood. Where such movements did take place, they were invariably led by outside agencies, such as political parties, activists, and social workers. Where tribals on their own have taken up such issues, they have invariably been part of larger issues, such as demands for political autonomy or for greater control over land, forests, and other resources. This has been the case with movements in both pre-independence and post-independence India.

As observed earlier, one of the features of agrarian movements among tribes has been resistance to the alienation of land from tribes to non-tribes. In recent years, the resistance to land alienation has increased in momentum, not so much in respect of alienation of land from tribes to nontribes but in respect of alienation resulting from large development projects, sponsored both by the state and by private capital. The effect or outcome of land alienation resulting from such projects is referred to as displacement. There has been massive displacement of tribal people throughout the postindependence period because of the exigencies of national development. However, the benefits of these development projects have not accrued to tribal people. Rather, they have been further impoverished because of their displacement. Hence, resistance against such projects has increased in the tribal regions in recent years. Many such movements are found in different parts of the country today. Some of these movements like the Koel Karo struggle in Jharkhand have been in existence for more than three decades. Some other important ongoing movements are the struggles of tribal people in Kashipur, Lanjigarh and Kalinga (Orissa), Nagarnar, and Mehendikheda (Chhattisgarh). The key players in these struggles have been the tribals themselves. NGOs and activists have also begun to support these struggles. Another noteworthy struggle against displacement (eviction of tribals from forests) that has received national attention in recent years is the struggle of tribals in Kerala, which is being spearheaded by a woman leader called Janu, under the auspices of the Adivasi Gotra Samaj.

Of the movements against displacement, the one that has received worldwide attention is the Narmada Bachao Andolan. This movement has attracted wide participation from wide a cross-section of people. The key

players besides the tribals are NGO and middle-class activists from different occupational and professional backgrounds. Indeed, the role of the latter has been so dominant that the movement has come to be strongly associated with these middle-class activists and NGOs. One of its singular achievements is that it has made a serious critique of the developmental model of the state, which continues to be in vogue even today. It has opened up an alternative vision of values and development.

#### Autonomy Movements

Of all the tribal movements, movements for autonomy have drawn wide attention. Autonomy movements are an expression of the larger articulation of identity by tribals. Such movements have been widespread in the northeastern region, where they have been based on intense mobilization. Elsewhere in the country, they have been confined to certain pockets of eastern, central, and western India. In Gujarat, tribes living in the southern part of the state demanded autonomy. In Madhya Pradesh, the Gonds demanded a separate state of Gondwana in the 1950s. Yet in Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh, the demands failed to become organized movements (Singh 1983; Desai 1983). The only autonomy movement worth its name in mainland India has been the movement for the separate state of Jharkhand. This has been one of the longest fought struggles and has passed through many historical ups and downs. Since its inception in the 1930s, it has undergone considerable changes in its character, organization, strategy, and mobilization. Since the 1970s, the earlier ethnic character of the movement changed into a regional character. Autonomy movements among tribes in mainland India have thus been few. With the exception of Jharkhand, the demand for autonomy in the form of a separate state here has been primarily employed as a strategy to gain some benefits or concessions for tribal people (Desai 1983).

In the north-eastern region, there have been many autonomy movements in various tribal areas and among different groups. Some of the prominent ones were waged by the Nagas, the Mizos, the Khasis*–*Jaintias*–*Garos, the Boros, and other tribal groups in Tripura. Some movements such as those of the Nagas, the Mizos, the Bodos, and the Tripuri tribes have gone to the extent of demanding secession from India. Although some degree of

autonomy has been granted to tribes and/or regions making such a demand, the movement for autonomy has not come to a stop. Rather, it has spread to new regions and tribes. Further, where the demand for autonomy has been dormant, or where it has not yet been granted, or where autonomy has fallen short of the aspirations of the people, there has been either a renewed interest in the movement (Gondwana) or the movement has become more intense and aggressive. The latter is the case, for example, with the Bodos and the Karbis in Assam and with the Tripuri tribals in Tripura.

The beginnings of the tribal autonomy movement in the form of a demand for a separate state can be traced to the period preceding the end of British rule. However, in nascent form, it had already appeared in the 1920s. The tribal leadership in Jharkhand and Nagaland had raised the issue during the visit of the Simon Commission to India. The difference between the two was that while the tribal leadership in Jharkhand articulated the demand for a separate state within India, Naga leadership demanded to a sovereign state. After India became independent, the movements for separate states in both Jharkhand and Nagaland grew more intense, involving mass mobilization and participation. The movement in Nagaland turned violent, and the Government of India had to deploy the army. Simultaneously, as a part of the strategy to contain the movement, the Nagas in 1963 were granted separate statehood within the Indian Union. The Nagas were, however, unhappy with the limited autonomy granted them, and the struggle for sovereign autonomy continues until this day. In Jharkhand, the demand was not given serious consideration, and the struggle, as in the case of Nagaland, continues.

Barring Nagaland, organized movements for autonomy either within the Indian Union or outside it, were, on the whole, absent in the north-eastern region in the early years after independence. By the 1960s, however, the movement for a separate state began to gain momentum among the tribes living in the hilly regions of Assam. The regions comprised the Khasi, Jaintia, and Garo Hills (which form the present-day state of Meghalaya), the Lushai Hills (which are part of the union territory of Mizoram), and the hill districts of the North Cachar and the Mikir Hills (in the present-day state of Assam). Paradoxically enough, the regions and/or districts already enjoyed a certain degree of autonomy, which was not enjoyed by the tribes,

including the hill tribes in the other states of the region, such as Tripura, Manipur, and Arunachal Pradesh, namely the erstwhile NEFA. Indeed, the earlier demand in Tripura was for an autonomous regional council under the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution.

Despite the autonomy enjoyed by the tribes of these areas, the demand for separate statehood continued. Soon the demand was transformed into a strong movement, based on intense mobilization and widespread participation. In Mizoram or the erstwhile Lushai Hills district, the movement moved in the direction of secession from India. The demand for a separate state was eventually conceded, and the state of Meghalaya and the union territory of Mizoram were created. In Mizoram, even after the granting of greater autonomy, the struggle for secession from India continued. Indeed, the movement during this period came to be marked by a widespread armed struggle. The struggle came to an end with the signing of an accord in 1986.

How do we explain the autonomy movements that took place during this period? After all, as noted earlier, the tribes already enjoyed some degree of autonomy. The answer lies in the fact that the autonomy granted to the tribes had in practice many limitations. To begin with, though autonomous district councils gave some powers to the tribes with respect to determining many aspects of their life, the powers granted to the institution suffered from certain limits, which came from two sources. The first source was the limited power given to the district council. The laws enacted by the council had no effect until the governor gave his assent. It could be dissolved as and when it was inconvenient to the state government. Even its acts and regulations could be annulled or suspended. The district council enjoyed certain executive functions in respect to several areas listed in the Sixth Schedule, but without any mandatory role of engagement with development activities. The sources of revenue for the district council and the regional council had been specified in the Constitution, but some of the major sources of revenue were under the control of the state government (Chaube 1973). The second—and more important—source of the limit to the powers of the district council came from the actual politics of the state of which the tribal regions formed a part. One of the major aspects of state-level politics was the deep divide between tribes and non-tribes, or plains people and hills

people. As noted earlier, state-level politics was dominated by the nontribes, which were not only numerically dominant but also socially and economically powerful. Not only did they dominate the tribes, they were also able to thwart and scuttle the functioning of the district council by blocking grants and creating other impediments (Chaube 1973). The district council thus failed to meet the needs and aspirations of the tribal people. The demand and movement for a separate state emerged out of these circumstances.

An interesting question is why the autonomy demands in the regions outside of north-eastern India (with the exception of Jharkhand) could not be translated into organized and sustained movements. In other words, what made the autonomy movement in Jharkhand sustainable?

One can identify a number of factors that were present in the case of Jharkhand and absent elsewhere in the region. One was that the tribes in Jharkhand had a long history of struggle against colonial rule and outside exploiters. This helped them to forge a shared identity despite various differences. They continued to suffer exploitation and domination in the post-independence period, and this served to further reinforce their sense of shared identity. In sharpening this identity, the role of a tiny but articulate middle class was crucial. It was the tribal middle class that experienced discrimination and domination most intensely in terms of access of the supposed benefits of development, employment, trade, commerce, etc. This helped to keep the struggle for autonomy alive. Further, increased communication among the middle classes in different places was facilitated by the growth of towns in the tribal region. Equally important was the strong sense of identification with their own language and culture, which sharpened the sense of difference between tribes and non-tribes. Indeed, wherever there has been a loss of language and culture, the movement for autonomy has generally been weak. This sense of common identity was further strengthened by identifying with a distinct religion, especially Christianity. Indeed, Christianity contributed to the vitality and vibrancy of tribal languages and cultures in many ways. The movement for autonomy in Jharkhand was thus rooted in cultural differences and uneven development between tribes and non-tribes. The factors that we see in Jharkhand were absent in other parts of mainland India. That explains why autonomy

movements in other parts of mainland India could not sustain themselves. The mark of identification of tribes such as the adivasis was undoubtedly an important and necessary factor in the articulation of a distinct identity, but this was not sufficient for transforming it into a process of actual political mobilization.

It is interesting to note that where tribes have experienced increasing marginalization as evidenced in the loss of control over land, forests, and other resources, and where there has been no provision for autonomy whatsoever, autonomy movements have generally been weak. The tribal situations in central, western, and southern India bear witness to this fact. The only exception has been Jharkhand, in eastern India. This means that pauperization and expropriation do not necessarily lead to the emergence of an autonomy movement. These factors are important but not sufficient causes, as one can see from cases other than that of Jharkhand.

Unlike the situation in central, western, and southern India, movements for autonomy have been widespread in the north-eastern region. The issue of autonomy has also been fought over most fiercely in this region. Interestingly, the demand for autonomy in the north-east has its genesis not so much in the marginalization of tribes as in the fear of losing their distinct language, culture, customs, and traditions on account of the domination of an alien language and culture (Chaube 1973; Das 1982; Goswami and Mukherjee 1982). This has been the case even where there has been largescale marginalization of tribes, as seen with the Bodos and the Tripura tribals. The tribes in Tripura, which constituted a majority until independence, became a minority after independence because of the exodus of Bengalis from former East Pakistan, now Bangladesh. This unprecedented demographic shift also led to the erosion of control over land, forests, and other resources. In the Bodo-inhabited areas of Assam too, the migration of the Assamese and the Bengalis has been going on since the period of British rule. As a result, large-scale alienation of land from tribes to non-tribes has continued for nearly a century. This has not only affected the demographic but also the cultural patterns of the region. The Assamese and Bengali languages were adopted and assimilation into Hinduism and its social structure took place, as has been the case with the Jharkhandi tribals. Yet that the cultural dimension, especially the issues of

language and script, remained at the heart of the movement (Mukherjee and Mukherjee 1982; Mukherjee and Singh 1982).

In short, the demand for autonomy in the north-east was based on the issue of identity. The social origins of autonomy movements and the degree of their mobilization thus lay not so much in pauperization and marginalization as in other factors. In this case, Sinha's formulation is pertinent in this context. In his view, tribal solidarity is positively correlated with factors such as ecological and socio-cultural isolation vis-à-vis the core peasantry, a certain numerical strength to provide striking power, location near an international border, a certain level of literacy and education to provide elite leadership, historical experience of conflict, opportunity for the 'political rank path', and limited scope for economic rewards (Sinha 1972). At the root of such movements lies a strong sense of identity politics. Autonomy movements by ethnic minorities have thus not been all of the same nature, level, and character. Broadly, they have been articulated in the form of demands for separate states within the Indian Union. It is when these demands have not been met that the demand has been raised for secession from India in the form of establishing a sovereign state. This is not to deny that some movements have been secessionist in character from the outset. However, such movements have been few.

To conclude, tribal movements—understood in the sense of movements articulated and engaged in by tribal people—have been, on the whole, heterogeneous and amorphous in nature, varying in character and orientation. This is because they have invariably tried to address a wide range of issues. This has been particularly true of movements organized and mobilized by the tribal people themselves. In contrast, movements initiated by forces outside tribal society, that is, political parties and activists, have been concerned primarily with livelihood issues. Hence, the construction of typologies has been one of the major concerns in the study of tribal movements. A typology worked out on the basis of issues has been the most widely accepted one. However, the study of tribal movements primarily in terms of issues fails to capture the other intricate dimensions of such movements. This is the case with all tribal movements, irrespective of whether they are described as being concerned with autonomy, identity, cultural or Sanskritization issues, or control over land and forest resources.

This is because of the diffused character of tribal society in which different aspects are intricately interwoven, making it difficult to determine where one begins and the other ends. These intricacies are often lost sight of when tribal movements are studied solely in terms of issues.

#### References

- Adhikary, A. K. and R. K. Bhattacharya. 1983. 'The Extremist Movement: An Appraisal of the Naxalite Movement with Special Reference to Its Repercussion Among Tribes', in *Tribal Movements in India,* Vol. 2, edited by K. S. Singh. New Delhi: Manohar, pp. 119–127.
- Areeparampil, Mathew. 1993. 'Socio-cultural and Religious Movements Among the Ho Tribals of Singhbhum District of Bihar', in *Continuity and Change in Tribal Society*, edited by M. Miri. Shimla: Indian Institute of Advanced Study, pp. 396–436.
- Basu, Swaraj. 2003. *Dynamics of a Caste Movement: The Rajbansis of North Bengal 1910–47*. New Delhi: Manohar.
- Bhatt, Vikas. 1983. 'A Baba in Bastar', in *Tribal Movements in India,* Vol. 2, edited by K. S. Singh. New Delhi: Manohar, pp. 223–41.
- Chaube, S. K. 1973. *Hill Politics in North-East India*. New Delhi: Orient Longman.
- Danda, A. K. 1983. 'Gahira Guru and His Sant Samaj Movement', in *Tribal Movements in India,* Vol. 2, edited by K. S. Singh. New Delhi: Manohar, pp. 197–208.
- Das, N. K. 1982. 'The Naga Movement.' in *Tribal Movements in India,* Vol. 1 edited by K. S. Singh. New Delhi: Manohar, pp. 39–52.
- Dasgupta, Pranab Kumar. 1983. 'The Adi Samaj Movement Among the Ho', in *Tribal Movements in India,* Vol. 2, edited by K. S. Singh. New Delhi: Manohar, pp. 93–107.
- Desai, I. P. 1983. 'The Tribal Autonomy Movement in South Gujarat', in *Tribal Movements in India,* Vol. 2, edited by K. S. Singh. New Delhi: Manohar, pp. 243–59.
- Dhanagare, D. N. 1983. *Peasant Movements in India 1920–50*. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
- Ekka, P. 1972. 'Revivalist Movements Among the Tribals of Chotanagpur', in *Tribal Situation in India*, edited by K. S. Singh. Shimla: Indian Institute of Advanced Study, pp. 424–31.
- ———. 2003. *Tribal Movements: A Study in Change*. Pathalgaon: Asha Deep.
- Fuchs, S. 1965. *Rebellious Prophets: A Study of Messianic Movements in Indian Religions*. Bombay: Asia Publishing House.
- Goswami, B. B. and D. P. Mukherjee. 1982. 'The Mizo Political Movement', in *Tribal Movements in India,* Vol. 1, edited by K. S. Singh. New Delhi: Manohar.
- Guha, R. 1983. *Elementary Aspects of Peasant Insurgency in Colonial India*. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
- Hardiman, D. 1987. *The Coming of the Devi*. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
- Iyer, K. Gopal, and R. N. Maharaj 1986. 'Agrarian Movements in Tribal Bihar (Dhanbad), 1972*–*80', in *Agrarian Struggles in India After Independence*, edited by A.R. Desai. New Delhi: Oxford University Press, pp. 330–61.
- Kabui, G. 1982. 'The Zeliangrong Movement: An Historical Study', in *Tribal Movements in India,* Vol. 2, edited by K. S. Singh. New Delhi: Manohar, pp. 53–66.