## **Introduction**

## *Mahendra Prasad Singh*

The post-colonial political system in India is founded on two major reconciliations between democracy and capitalism, on the one hand, and parliamentarianism and federalism, on the other. Democracy implies individual rights and liberties, equality, popular sovereignty, and constitutionalism (i.e., rule of law, not only by law, but governments are limited by the constitution). Capitalism is based on property rights and attendant privileges, profit-driven market mechanism, the ideal of economic competition, and the reality of monopolistic and oligopolistic concentration of economic powers. The two are obviously antithetical, yet in the historical trajectory of liberal democracies in the West and in the Third World, democracy and capitalism have coexisted in an indifferent and uneasy coalition. Likewise, parliamentarism and federalism are primarily contradictory. In parliamentary form of government the final chain of command ends up in the Parliament, whereas federalism is premised on division of power between the Parliament and state legislatures and decentralization. Yet Canada, originally and innovatively, in 1867, Australia in 1900, India in 1949, and some other countries like Germany in Europe have tried to combine these two divergent principles and forms of government in their constitutions.

These two aforementioned reconciliations are the products of complexities and diversities of India's composite culture and social structure as also the ideological consensus forged during the nationalist movement and after independence. This ideological consensus attempted to prepare a middle ground between the extremes of capitalism and socialism. The Preamble to the Indian Constitution proclaims a state founded by it to be "a Sovereign, Socialist, Secular, Democratic Republic" and enjoins it "to secure to all its citizens: justice, social, economic, and political; Liberty of thought, expression, belief, faith, and worship; Equality of status and of opportunity, and to promote among them all Fraternity assuring the dignity of the individual and unity and integrity of the Nation". Moreover, Parts III and IV of the Constitution on Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles of State Policy respectively give expression both to the early liberalism centered on bourgeois political rights and later liberalism that opened up to accommodate some economic policy goals aimed at creating a more egalitarian society with at least minimum social securities. The Directives do not really amount to either a full-fledged post-World War II Western welfare state (*e.g.,* Scandinavia, England, Canada, etc.) nor to a Soviet socialist economy. But they certainly give expression to the intention of going beyond classical liberalism *a la* Adam Smith to set up an Indian version of "socialistic pattern" of economic development. The Nehru-Mahalanobis strategy of planned economic development with the state (public sector) seeking to scale the "commanding heights of the economy" became the main ingredients of the new economy. The structure of mixed economy that emerged after Independence allowed both the public sector and the private sector to operate, but the latter came to be increasingly put under a variety of state controls that came to be pejoratively called the "permit-license-quota Raj" by conservatives like C. Rajagopalachari who pleaded for more space and greater freedom for the private sector. The vast agrarian sector, after some land reform measures, remained as a private peasant household production sector. The Indian government under Nehru followed economic policies premised on self-reliance and growth with justice and equity.

With increasing political populism and crisis in the public sector of the economy under the government of Indira Gandhi, Prime Ministers Rajiv Gandhi and P.V. Narasimha Rao, especially the latter, introduced significant measures of economic liberalization, bureaucratic deregulation, public sector disinvestment, and structural readjustment to permit a greater scope for the market, simultaneously opening it up to international competition, investment, and technology. The most comprehensive package of economic liberalization by Indian standards has been brought about by the Rao government and the successive governments have not substantially turned back; if anything, they have gone further in this direction. The Rao government started as a one-party minority government, but subsequently turned into a majority one in the latter half of its mandate. When Rao initiated the major package of economic reforms, his government was in a minority with oppositional majority in the Parliament. So evidently the economic reforms represented a consensus in the party system, at least a dominant consensus with only marginal opposition from the Left and the Right. For the Rao government and the successor coalition governments it was led successively by the Janata Party/Dal, Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), and Indian National Congress (Indira), BJP under Narendra Modi until 2014 have willy-nilly continued the same economic policies, even though they widely diverged in their socio-cultural policies. Since most of these governments have been coalitional, the economic policies pursued by them have been products of delicate bargaining and balance in steering committees of the coalition cabinets. Even the Hindu Right nationalist BJP, as first majority party to get a single party majority in the Lok Sabha after a gap of 30 years in 2014, has continued the ongoing traditions of federal coalition governments and neoliberal economic reforms. Another notable feature of the economic reforms is that they have come to pass without any formal amendments to the Constitution.

Both capitalism and socialism swear by democracy, each claiming to establish a more genuine democracy. Marxists claim to institute economic democracy in place of empty political democracy of the liberals. They ask what is the use of formal political equality without freedom from hunger and other wants? The liberals retort that men do not live by bread alone! Liberals like John Rawls argue that both liberty and equality are equally important values which cannot be compromised, except that in case of equality a compromise is permissible only in favor of the most disadvantaged sections of the society.

 The historical evolution of both liberal democracies and socialist societies shows that the correlation between capitalism and democracy has proved, at least thus far, to be more viable than that between socialism and democracy. However, real democratic possibilities have often been thwarted by both capitalism and socialism in the real world thus far. The experience of socialist countries so far attests that not only democratic freedoms but also economic equality beyond a certain point have in their domains remained a will o' wisp. Capitalist democracies too get very uneasy when the parties of the Left and the Right confront each other with really radical ideological options in a mood to fight it out to the hilt. The Great Economic Depression of the 1930s in the West was the product of the constant fall in the demand in the face of expanding capitalist production due to the repeated failure of a weak working class to win over continuous and significant increase in wages. The period witnessed the collapse of democracy in Germany and Italy and the rise of Nazism and Fascism.

The West emerged from the Great Economic Depression and the Second World War and followed Keynesian economic policies of demand management by expansion of state activities and expenditure, and instituted in the process what came to be known as Welfare State. By the late 1960s the welfare state came to grief due to "stagflation"—galloping inflation outpacing the steady wage expansion of workers and employees and the resultant fall in demand causing recession in the economy. The wars in West Asia and oil-shocks due to heavy increase in the price of the gasoline and petroleum products further intensified the economic crisis.

"Reaganomics" and "Thatcherism" which surfaced in by the 1980s and 1990s spelled the undoing of the welfare state and Keynesianism. The reconciliation of capitalism and democracy in the welfare state proved to be unviable. The restructuring of production globally coupled with the decline of the power of the organized working class to counteract and countervail the power of capital was the result. In most recent elections in the West social democratic parties have registered electoral gains, including power to govern. In India too, the left has declined in parliamentary as well as state assembly elections (notably in West Bengal yielding ground to Trinamool Congress in 2011 after 34 years of continuous Left Front rule and lost again to it in 2016) in the recent years.

The collapse of communism in 1989 in the Soviet Union and eastern Europe, failure of liberal welfare states and crisis in the social democratic welfare states since the 1970s and 1980s under fiscal overloads and human cupidity by onslaughts of capitalist globalization after the end of the Cold War, have cumulatively tended to produce enormous increase in economic inequalities and disparities among classes and regions *within* as well as *among* nations on an unprecedented scale. Moreover, financial crisis in East Asian miracle capitalist economies in the late 1990s and in metropolitan capitalist centres in North America, European Union, and Japan in 2008-2009 have produced what has belatedly been called the Great Economic Recession.

There is some sign of the economic and political rise of Asia in the post-Cold War world. China, India, and Indonesia have emerged as the fastest growing economies in the world in the 21st century. Despite heavy pressures from Pakistan and China, India in the post-economic liberalization phase has for the first time since the British period and after, scored a rate of annual GDP growth of 5-7 percent. It is spectacular compared to the average growth rate of 1.5 percent in British India and 3.5 per cent in the post-Independence period before the 1990s. The growth rate suffered a setback in 2016-17 due to demonetization of higher value currency and transition to Goods and Services Tax (GDP). But by the year-end of 2017, economic prospects are looking up and would presumably be more robust in the years ahead. What should, however, worry the policy makers is that the high GDP growth is not adequately matched in terms of distributive justice and human development especially measured in terms of education, public health, and poverty. India has been ranked in top 100 among nations in the ease of doing business but also ranks in top 100 in the hunger index.

The world seems to be on the crossroads without any definitive sign whether capitalist globalization resulting in the decline of the nationstate and the triumph of the global market forces will have a field day or neo-Hobbesian political conservatism strengthening the national state protecting its domestic industries which will finally emerge victorious. The democratic dream predicted on participatory democracy and extension of democracy from the political arena to the workplace and family however, has been expanding farther.

The combination of parliamentarianism and federalism in India's parliamentary federal system, has led the politics in India, in the 1980s and 1990s, towards federalizing the predominantly parliamentary regime that had become overly centralized during the long periods of Congress predominance. The 1980s witnessed a phenomenal spurt in the rise of demands for greater state autonomy by parties, movements, and state governments forcing Prime Minister Indira Gandhi to appoint in 1983 the first Commission on Centre-State Relations chaired by Justice R.S. Sarkaria of the Supreme Court and comprising two other commissioners. The Commission submitted its monumental 2-volume report in 1987-88, favoring the strengthening of intergovernmental agencies of consultation and deliberation such as the National (Economic) Development Council, Inter-State Council, Planning Commission, Finance Commission, etc., and constitutionally entrenching those that do not already enjoy such status. It also recommended a fundamental change in the attitude and behavior of federal and state functionaries, especially the Governor, in consonance with the federal value of state autonomy. The BJP-led National Democratic Alliance government appointed the National Commission for Review of the Working of the Constitution (2002) headed by Justice M.N. Venkatachaliah and the Congress-led United Progressive Alliance government appointed the second Commission on Centre-State Relations chaired by Justice M.M. Punchhi (2010) recommended a slew of some of the same federal constitutional reforms as the Sarkaria Commission plus a few additional ones. However, none of these reforms has yet been implemented by the government, including the ones that appointed them.

Nevertheless, the trend of greater federalization of the Indian political system has moved on steadily largely under the impact of party system transformation from one-party dominance to multiparty system with federal coalitional governance since 1989. There has been a reversal of this trend since the 2014 Lok Sabha elections which was spectacularly won by Narendra Modi-led BJP, yet the federal thrust of the system has not been blunted, thanks to the continuing electoral base of some regional parties like All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (AIADMK, belatedly suffering a setback in the demise of its supremo, J. Jayalalitha in December 2016), Biju Janata Dal, and Trinamool Congress, as the oppositional majority in the federal second chamber Rajya Sabha countervailing the governmental majority in the national chamber, Lok Sabha.

Indian federalism is rooted in the country's history and regional diversities. The growing trend of federalization in the past two decades is accounted by at least three factors that have become active in recent times. The first of these is the growing levels of politicization and relative deprivation experienced by the various social groups and regions, especially the peasants and farmers all over the country and some ethnic groups having regional concentration, especially in Assam, Punjab, Jammu and Kashmir. Authoritarian trends in the dominant Congress party and its inability to provide avenues for political mobility to newly politicized groups in some States and also the dissatisfaction of the mass public with it led to the emergence of non-Congress all-India or regional parties, augmenting the trend of federalization.

This leads us to the second factor behind the growing federalization of the Indian polity, namely, the party system's transition from one-party dominance to multi-party system of polarized pluralism and regionalism. This growing diversity in the party system resulted in the multiplicity of parties in control of the two chambers of the Parliament and state legislatures and the various state governments. All these factors and forces together heralded the era of coalition governments at the centre and in some States. However, the growing trend of the absence of intra-party democracy is turning into the Achilles' heel of Indian democracy as it deepens the crisis of democratic and constitutional governance of India and its states.

The judicial behavior is the third factor contributing to the growing trend of federalization. In any federal system the judiciary inevitably emerges as the final adjudicator of jurisdictional conflicts between the federal and State governments. The position of the judiciary is further strengthened if the written federal constitution also contains, as the Indian Constitution does, a written charter of fundamental rights of citizens. Judicial activism over the controversy on the constitutional amendments in India goes back to at least late 1960s (*Golaknath v. State of Punjab*, Supreme Court, 1967) and *Keshavananda Bharati v. State of Kerala*, Supreme Court, 1973). Activism over socio-economic, civic, and environmental issues is a development of the 1980s and 1990s. This has developed in the context of dysfunctionality of the executive and legislative organs of the state. The judicial activism in the federal domain surfaced in the Supreme Court's judgement in *S.R. Bommai v. the Union of India* (1994), in which the Supreme Court for the first time reviewed and declared unconstitutional in some specific instances of the proclamations of President's rule in some states; earlier the Supreme Court had been reticent to look into such cases as "political thickets" within the domain of the Union executive. In the changed ambience, the Patna High Court in 1997, asserted that the courts could even advise the President on whether the constitutional machinery in a state had actually broken down, inviting central intervention. Until now the matter had been under the exclusive purview of the executive (the Governor and the President, in effect the Union Council of Ministers). One may also add that the constitutional offices of the President and Governors are now increasingly becoming more self-conscious about their constitutional responsibilities, especially in the context of "hung" legislatures and coalition or minority governments. A new federal ferment has come to grip the Indian political system.

The process of liberalized capitalism, thus, has resulted into two major transformation; economically, old capitalist production methods and precapitalist social formation have been marginalized and market relations have been strengthened and expanded; politically, new party system and federal relations have emerged and social structure has become more democratic. This dynamics of social change and the constant growth of knowledge necessitated a new addition of this book which has been enlarged and revised. Two new chapters have been incorporated and many chapters have been revised.

In the chapters that follow, these general trends in the Indian political system are examined more closely. Part I deals with the historical context and legacies that impinge on the contemporary polity. Beginning with the evolution of the state, the colonial state in India, the section focuses on the role of colonial capitalism that gradually replaced the preceding traditional village-centric economy and decentralized state structure with market economy and modern state having rational-legal bureaucracy and limited representative institutions. The national movement that emerged as a consequence of this rule had different approaches and visions to solve their contemporary problems. It not only freed the country from the colonial yoke but also created the governmental structures for further governance through constitutional mode. The basic principle was liberal-democratic rule premised on capitalist economy under the command of the state, both of which, in essence, were planted by the British.

The governmental structures which Part II deals with are comprised of parliamentary federalism along with the executive and the judiciary. The representative democracy becoming more participatory with the passage of time has not only liberalized the fundamental rights of the citizens but has also brought directive principles concerned with the core issues of development and governance, at par with the fundamental rights in some respects through judicial interpretation and activism. Not only that, it has facilitated the federalization of polity by checking the misuse of powers of the Union executive and has been the motor force of democratization of some of the Constitutional and political bodies in which elements of decay had set in. It also encouraged the legislature to formulate laws that provided impetus to secularization of polity. Simultaneously, it also acted on deterrent against the unaccountable behavior of the political parties and trade unions towards the public in general. Such themes have been discussed independently in Part III with much broader perspectives that also include topics like Panchayati Raj, gender issue, regionalism and electoral process. Basically, all these themes revolve around issues that influence and mobilize considerable number of people or its different segments. Political parties, non-governmental organizations, panchayats, and trade unions play an important role in such mobilization that calls for policy formulation and brings the state face to face with the people.

Part IV deals with such public policies that touches upon the major chunk of population and important areas of society. The discussion brings forth the trends of development in respective fields, points out the flaws in the policies, brings forth the areas of concern and suggests alternative or remedial measures.

Finally, Part V discusses the trends of development in India since Independence and based on it points out its future prospects. The focus is on three aspects: participation of the people in democratization process for determining their own destiny, thrust on global trade and capital flow and global and regional integration of the Indian economy. All the three issues manifest in multifarious ways with no unilinear development.

To sum up, the volume deals with important and topical issues that influence the Indian people and provides a critique and alternative to the public policies and problems of governance.