# XVI

# Administration of Scheduled Areas and Tribal Areas

IN THE chapter on objectives and strategy, we have dealt with the question of translation of Constitutional provisions into reality for the scheduled tribe population. The present chapter is devoted to amplification of some of the provisions of the Fifth Schedule particularly with reference to their operation so far. In the second section of this chapter, we deal with administration of tribal areas. The distinction between Scheduled Areas and tribal areas needs to be understood. Scheduled Areas are those defined by a notification of the President under the Fifth Schedule. Attempts have been made to make the Schedule Area's and TSP areas co-terminus; by and large they are. However, the term "tribal areas' does not have exact connotation, but may be understood to include TSP areas, pockets of tribal concentration etc. The observations in the latter section of this chapter are meant to apply to tribal areas.

- 2. The Fifth Schedule of the Constitution imposes a special responsibility on the State for peace and good Government of the tribal areas. The executive powers of the Union extends to giving directic.is to the State as to the administration of such areas. The regulation making powers conferred by the Fifth Schedule on the Governor is a unique device designed to help imparting flexibility to the Union and State laws applicable to the Scheduled Areas. Purposefully used, the provisions of the Fifth Schedule can be of great help in reinforcing the effectiveness of the TSP mechanism in the tribal areas.
- 3. So far, however, the provisions of the Fifth Schedule have not been utilized co the full extent by the States. Though sub para 2 of paragraph 5 of the Fifth Schedule visualizes making regulations for the peace and good Government of Scheduled Areas specifically for:
  - (a) prohibiting or restricting transfer of land by or among members of scheduled tribes;

- (b) regulating allotment of land to members of such tribes; and
- (c) regulating carrying on the business of money-lending;

There are quite a few States which have not formulated regulations on a number of these items or, having formulated, adequate law to che:^k money lending in the Scheduled Areas. So far as land alienation law is concerned, the State of Kerala having passed the Kerala Scheduled Tribes (Restriction of Transfer of Land and Restoration of Alienated Land) Act, 1975 have not yet enforced the Act in the Scheduled Areas. The State of Andhra Pradesh have issued an executive order detracting considerably, from applicability of the Andhra Pradesh (Scheduled Areas) Land Transfer Regulation, 1959, by stipulating that lands of tribals in possession of non-tribals who own less than 5 acres irrigated land or 10 acres unirrigated land need not be restored to tribals.

- 4. Anti-exploitative measures contribute substantially to the success of tribal sub-Plan strategy. The anti-exploitative can be legislated deriving sanction from the provisions of the Fifth Schedule, wliich have a wide amplitude. The measures have to be implemented earnestly to be able to provide adequate support to the development measures under the TSP. The Dhebar Commission (1961) had observed in measures paragraph 5.20 of its Report that the provision of paragraph 5 of the Fifth Schedule should be implemented 'wiil-.in a given period'. There is even now a case for reiterating this view. We hope that all the State Governments will institute necessary action in any case before the end of the first year of the Seventh Plan to enact where necessary, and implement the relevant measures.
- 5. Mention has already been made of the fact that the Government of a State has been empowered to make regulation for peace and good government of the Scheduled Areas. Regulations have been framed as indicated earlier in the context of conditions prevalent in these areas. Nevertheless, tribal resurgence has been asserting itself against exploitation in land, labour, forest and excise cic They have also not been happy - with induction of ibrnign funds, infiltration into tribal area's ● and prosclyiisatioii. Other mrdes of e.xploitation have been dealt wiih in a separate chaolei. Here, wc urge that (a) entry into tribal aieas of culside'-s, p.irticularly foreigners, should be

regulated; (b) foreign funds and foreign agencies should not be allowed to operate in Scheduled Areas, and for the purpose, the Foreign Exchange (Regulation) Act, 1978 may be modified.

## GOVERNOR'S REPORT

6. Para 3 of the Fifth Schedule of the Constitution requires the Governor of each State having Scheduled Areas to make a report to the President regarding administration of such areas in the State. The prevalent feeling is that these reports have more or less fallen into routine grooves and mostly tend to be a modified version of the annual reports of the Tribal Development departments. The Union Government has not yet formally prescribed the items or aspects which should go into the annual reports of the Governors. There is no doiibt that a rigid format will be undcsirabWand the Governors having vast powers under the Fifth Schedule for the administration of the Scheduled Areas can be relied upon to report and keep the President informed of important problems of Scheduled Areas. Even so, the Ministry of Home Affairs should examine the manner in which Governor's report to the President can reflect the correct state of affairs in tribal areas of a State and the extent to which guidelines should be formulated.

## Tribes Advisory Councils

7. Para 4 of the Fifth Schedule of the Constitution enjoins establishment of a Tribes Advisory Council in each State having Scheduled Areas. Such Councils can be established in States having Scheduled Tribes though not Scheduled Area, if the President so directs. There has been a growing feeling that the frequency of meetings of the Tribes Advisory Council leaves much to be desired. The rules for the working of Tribes Advisory Councils in various States prescribe that the Council would meet 4 times a year in case of Kerala, Tripura, Utter Pradesh and Rajasthan and twice a year in case of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Himachal Pradesh, Mahar^htra, Orissa and West Bengal. The number of times that the Council may meet in a year has not been specified in the States of Madhya Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Gujarat. Thus, there is no uniformity in the prescription as to the number of meetings to be held by the Tribes Advisory Council. It appears desirable to prescribe uniformly for all the concerned States that the Council should meet at least once in each half year and twice in a year, while

leayiing the provisions regarding larger number of meefings in certain. States unchanged.

8. Of grCdt practical consideration is the actual number of meeting of the Tribes Advisory Council held in the §t|tes. As Tribes Advisory Council is an important instrurhlht fashioned to take an over-view of the efficacy these substantially contribute, by way of constructive criticism and suggestions, to the toning up of the administration, tile Governor of the State may have to playa bigger role in ensuring timely and purposiv^%etings of these Councils. In view of the clear position in paii^ph 3 of the 5th Schedule that the executive power of the Union shall extend to giving of directions to the States as to the administration of the Scheduled Areas in the Sfates and in view of the fact that association and participatibri of tribal representatives at the highest level in the States is an important prerequisite and aid to ensure success of tribal programmes, we would suggest the Union Government might give specific directions to the States to activise the Tribes Advisory Council to an adequate degree.

### Administration of Tribal Areas

- 9. The tribal sub-Plan has been in operatioili since 1974-75 for varying periods in the tribal areas of the country. Special provisions on administration and control of tribal areas have been incorporated in the Fifth Schedule of the Constitution in pursuance of Article 244(1) of the Constitiilipn. These provisions apply to administration of the Schedule^ Areas and Scheduled Tribes in States o'.her than the States of Assam and Meghalaya. Wide powers are conferred on the Governors of the States to make regulations for peace and good Government of the Scheduled Areas under this Schedule.
- 10. The administrative units which cover the Scheduled Areas tribal areas in the country are the following:-
  - (1) ITDP/ITDPAs comprising tribal majority areas in the States dpyer 22 whole Districts, 633 whole blocks, besides 97 ,part. Districts and 280 part blocks. They take care of most of the geog.aphical areas of tribal concentration. While Orissa and Andhra Pradesh have opted for an agency model registered under the Societies Registration Acif"^d named these units as ITDAs, other

; l^lates have preferred to keep them as Govetnment Organisations. There are at present 181 ITDAs /ITDPs sp^ad all over the country.

- (2) Where tribals live inter-mixed with general population, constituting at least 50 per cent of the ectal population in a pocket, a special approach for development of such pockets known as ^'modified area development approach" has been adopted. There were 245 projects for such MADA pockets during the final year of the Sixth Plan. These projects are in charge of part-time or whole-time special officers.
- (3) For the most back^air^ section of the scheduled tribes termed as 'primitiv^. tribes' projects have been formulated. These projects numbering 72 comprise specific entities as the^mallest units of tribal area administration by postinig# special staff for the purpose.
- 11. Apart from the above, some States have resorted to the device of autonomous regional Tribal Development Authorities. In Bihar, the States Government has established three Tribal Development Authorities for North Chhotanagpur, South Chhotanagpur and Santhal Pargana regions by Statute. In all the three cases, the Chief-Minister is the Chairman. A Regional Development Commissioner assisted by a secretariat and supervisory powers over all concerned sectors of development touching the tribal population and with separate secretariat and Directorate level officers attached to him functions as the secretary of authorities. The idea of a separate Regional Authority for Tribal Development has been tried recently (1980) by Madhya Pradesh and five regional authorities for tribal: areas of Baster, East Zone, Central Zone, Notth?Zone and Sbuth-West Zone have been set up. But in this c^e the authorities have been established by administrative order with divisional Commissioner as the President of the authorities and with a Minister of the State functioning as President of the Advisory and Review Committee for these authorities. In the latter, the local MLAs and MPs, Janpad President and Division Commissioner who is the President of the authority are members. Both in ^||)fiar and Madhya Pradesh, the purpose of institution of such^Special authorities is to ensure speedy execution of schemed of development for scheduled tribes by higher administrative and financial delegation to the authorities

and through coordination of the sectoral programmes at a sufficiently high level.

- 12. The ITDPs were intended to develop and translate into reality the concept of co-ordinated work at that level by field level consultation amongst planning and executioning officers of different sectoral programmes. With this end in view, a sufficiently senior officer was suggested to be posted as the Project Administrator to such units, while the District Collector functioned as the Chairman of the Project Level/ Project Implementation Committees. While there is no doubt that posting of wholetime project officers / project administrators has imparted keenness to iinplementation of tribal development pro^mmes to a degree, it can be observed that the integration originally visualised at the if DP level has not been fully realised. The main reasons appear to be the following
  - (1) In quite a few States, tlie project officers / the project administrators have not been given the co-ordinating role, either by themselves or on behalf of the Collector, for the programmes undertaken within the project area. While declaration of intention of Government to this effect is not lacking in many States, in practice these officers have not grown beyond the statue of another staff officer of the Collector, on account of lack of clear cut mechanism for day-to-day co-ordination.
  - (2) Specific administrative and financial delegations to project administrators do not generally cover work and programme of other development departments and are generally confined to work and programme of the tribal welfare / tribal development department. In fact, in some States they handle programmes related to the special Central assistance only while in an odd-State or so they have been reduced to supernumerary state. Thus, their status has been highly down-graded from that of comprehensive coordinators visualised in the TSP set-up.
  - (3) In some States like Orissa and Andhra Pradesh the project administrators have been authorised to make entries in the annual performance records (CRs) of the Block Development Officers. But this does not apply to all the States and relationship between the Block and the ITDP continues to be somewhat undefined and ambiguous.

- The relationship between the autonomous Tribal (4) Development authorities and the ITDPs needs to be specifically spelt out with the project officers being taken in as full-fledged members of such authorities.
- Programmes of economic development for the rural areas (5) like the IRD have special agencies, namely, the DRDA for implementation and there is no direct link-up between the DRDA and the ITDP except that the Project Officer of the ITDP is a member of the DRDA. The same applies to the programmes like DPAP, NREP and RLEGP. In the perspective of the situation in which these special programmes developed, a 'district view' or a 'block view' rather than an "ITDP view" has been taken. There is need for clear inter-linkage between the rural development agencies and ITDP.

## Measures for Co-ordination at Project Level

13. Coordination of programmes at the ITDP level is essential if an integrated approach to development of scheduled tribes is to be adopted. We appreciate that in the historical context of the growth of the developmental administration in the districts in the country, if may not be convenient or easy to put the ITDP project administrator in sole controlling charge of all items of development administration within his jurisdiction. Such a step may lead, vis-a-vis departmental supervisors, dilution of responsibility and control and may generate unnecessary cross correspondence. But we have no doubt that an ITDP Officer can conveniently be both the nodal officer for tribal development of the area and the controlling officer for tribal development of the area. This should be quite practicable particularly in ITDPs which comprise of whole sub-Division/Blocks. In such cases. the Project Officer/ Project Administrator could function as the controlling officer and supervision officer of all developmental agencies and programmes in the project areas. The feeling that the project officer is only another staff officer of the Collector would not hold good in such cases provided a clear-cut line of command is defined by the State Governments. Such an arrangement may not pose any difficulty in 22 full districts and 633 full blocks which are covered under ITDPs. In rest of the ITDP areas where part districts / Blocks are covered l view has to be taken in each case.

14. In case of schemes like IRDP, DRAP, RLEGP and NREP in other areas the Project Officer could be declared as the

intermediate level supervisory officer in respect of the tribal project area under the district collector, with powers to report on the performance of the officers implementing these programmes.

15. Over a period of time, it has been felt by the State Administrations that it may not be possible to vest the Project Administrator (PA) who are normally in Class I of the State Service with powers of control over the other district level officers many of whom are also generally in Class I of the State or all India Services. Apart from mere protocol or rank, the other important objective has been not to entrust control to an officer who does not oversee the whole of a district level officer's work. To strike a balance mid-way respecting both the existing structure of the district administration and the urgent requirements of tribal development, we would suggest as follows:-

The PAs belonging to the superior services of the State all India cadres may make annual entries in the performance records of all Class II Officers of all developmental services and cadres of the State Governments working in the project areas. The PAs may at their discretion inspect both the offices and the field work of such Class II officers working within their jurisdiction.

- 16. As the above observations would show, while we would suggest the ITDP to be an agency for implementation of programmes we would like to make it a sufficiently strong agency for intervention in several important sectors. To this end it would be desirable to strengthen the ITDPs by providing them with a few Assistant Project Administrators who would be in charge of specific sectors of development arid would assist the Project Administrator. The number of officers to assist the PA in this manner would depend upon the size and population covered in an ITDP and scheme required to be taken up in the area.
- 17. Apart from the above suggestions, in order to make the ITDP an effective agency for intervention in developmental administration in tribal areas, the Project administrator / officer may in suitable cases head the subdivision / Block level Development Committees in the tribal sub-Plan areas and where the SDOs / Collectors are the Chairman of such Committees at any level, the Project administrator / officer

should invariably be nlade a member of such committees. In this connection recommendations on these lines under "Participation and invoivement of Tribals in Tribal Area Administration" may also b^,^en.

## District/Region/State LeVel

- 18. The Collector is the Chairmian of ITDP level project formulation/implementation comniittee which has both officials and non-officials as its' members. linfthe States of Gujarat and Maharashtra where the district"level Panchayati Raj administration is functioning satisfactorily, the Executive Officer in-charge of the Zila Parishadas also been fully kept in the picture. There is no gain-saying that unifying authority offhe Collector should be fully brought into pl^y to make the tribal area administration more effective and ih^hningful.
- 19. Between the ITDP / District on the one hand the Tribal Development Department at the State level on the other, there are UVS; important functionaries namely (1) the Divisional Commissioners and (2) the Tribal Development Comhii^ioners in diflfeient States. There are Additional or Joint Commissioners below the Tribal Development Commissioners in State like Maharashtra and Rajasthan not attached to the office of the Divisional Commissioners but in-charge of independent territorial and functional jurisdictions. In certain other States there are separate Directors for tribal development besides the office of the. Tribal Development Commissioner, with specific responsibilities entrusted to the Directoifs) at the State level, but with no field functionaries under him. The Position is not very clear and exercise of supervision and control has not been found to be very satisfactory whether relating to formulation of plans and schemes or relating to day-to-day administration. The time has now come, to put this matter on a sound basis with an intelligible string of command flowing from top to bottom and an equally intelligible and decipherable picture of accountability. To fulfil siich a requirement we would recommend as follows :-
  - (1) In the Tribal Development Department at the State level a post of Commissioner for Tribal Development should be instituted in all the States. This functionary should co ordinate all plan and non-plan programmes in the sphere of tribal development. He shall equally be responsible for ■ pursuing and reviewing implementation of the protective

and anti-exploitative measures designed to improve the lot of the tribals^

- (2) There may be one or more Directors under the Tribal Development Commissioner for looking to general welfare schemes, specific area planning, project formulation and implementation of protective and antiexploitative measures.
- (3) At the Divisional Commissioner's level officers of the rank of Additional Directors / Joint Directors could be posted in full charge of all the items which the Commissioner handles at the State level. These officers should work under the supervision and guidance of the Divisional Commissioners as the Commissioner of division, like the Collector of the District is the node where all activities, development and regulatory, are co ordinated and synthesised.
- (4) The Project Administrator of the ITDP should have the authority to supervise the work of the sub-Division Block/Taluk level Tribal Welfare Officers posted within his jurisdiction besides exercising authority as recoinmended in para 5.3.
- (5) At the district level, the District Tribal Development Officer by whatever designation he is called, may be strengthened to discharge his duties effectively in presenting a complete picture of tribal area programmes, both developmental and protective, to be District Collector and act in accordance with the policy guidelines in the matter from the State Government. These officers should not act merely as the stipend/ scholarship distribution officers which is the case in some States at, present.
- 20. We do not recommend disturbing changes in the existing organisational pattern all at a time. But we would strongly urge that a clear chain of command and accountability in decision making, implementation and supervision be attempted so as to streamline the administration in the tribal areas as effectively as possible. In our view, it would be more advisable, to strengthen the tribal area administration at the appropriate level as indicated above including the itijP level and ensure suitable participation and involvement of the traditional tribal institutions and their functionaries as suggested elsewhere, rather than

multiply intermediate agencies of the nature of autonomous Regional Dievelopment authority.

## State Level Committees

21. Some States haVe Cabinet sub-Committees presided over by the Chief Minister to review and take policy decision or formulation and implementation of tribal development programmes. Some States have committees functioning under the Chief Minister' comprised of other Ministers and concerned State-level officers. Some other states have committees comprised of other Ministers, Tribal Development and officials, States like Bihar, Orissa, Madhya Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh have committees functioning under Chief Secretaries or Development Commissioners. The basic requirement is that the committees should function effectively and regularly with a view to integration and coordination of tribal development programmes. So long as such committees fulfil this objective, they should be allowed to continue. Where they are dormant, the underlying cause of inactivity should be extirpated, if necessaiy by performing a thorough overhaul. Social scientists, academicians and thinkers of repute might be associated with these bodies with advantage.

## Role of Project Administrators of ITDPs in Protective Sphere

22. Providing: service under one roof is an important concept under public adhiinistration in general, though it is emphasised more in the context of business administration. In tribal area administratioh, this has found favour already with a few State Governments who have invested the project Administrators of the ITDPs powers under several protective legislations, besides their developmental role. A specific mention may be made of the State of Andhra Pradesh where the PAs are wielding appellate authority under the land alienation and moneylending legislations in force in the State. Apart from the desirability of the "one-door" approach so far as the tribals are concerned, equally welcome would be the likely performance of the institution of the Project Administrator as a more competent and effective functionary in tribal area administration if they are kept in picture to deal with the exploitative forces operating in the tribal sphere. Being specifically entrusted with the tribal sector it is also expected

that the PAs will feel more actively involved in implementation of the protective measures and hence may be alive to give a boost to their implementation. We would, therefore, recommend that the PAs who are generally senior officers of the State and All India Services may be invested with appellate powers of the Collector under legislations relating to land alienation, money and such other legislation as may be necessary. Adequate supporting staff to deal with this item of work should be provided to them.

## EffectiveSupervision over MADA Pockets and **Primitive Tribe Projects**

23. Project-level committees have not been formed for pockets of tribal concentration under modified area development approach in most of the States, though the Ministry of Home Affairs had requested the State Governments to this effect. The functioning of these committees has not been regular wherever they exist. The Special Officers-in-charge of these projects are inadequately supervised in most of the States. there being no direct hierarchy of supervision over them. This situation applied equally well to the primitive tribe projects. In the interest of effective supervision, it will be desirable to place the MADA pockets and primitive tribes projects under the supervision of the Project Administrator of the nearby ITDPs, as far as possible. Except where Project level committees have been constituted separately for the MADA pockets and the primitive tribe projects, and the concerned State Governments intend to continue these separate PLCs., the Project-level Committees for the ITDP may also function MUTATIS MUTANDIS as the PLC for these projects. This will have the further advantage of doing away with a plethora of committees and meetings.

## Personnel Policy

24. The Maheshwar Prasad Group on Administration in the Tribal Areas recommended several measures to be taken in the sphere of selection of officers, creation of special cadres, institution of it system of special leave and other service benefits, besides special allowance, for personnel posted to the tribal areas. The Seventh Finance Commission awarded an amount of Rs. 30.71 crores for payment as compensatory allowance to such staff working in 13 States. The Eighth Finance Commission

has awarded Rs. 30 crores for payment of compensatory allowance to State employees posted in tribal areas and Rs. 37.82 crores for construction of residential accommodation in tribal areas. While the States have, in ' general, accepted the recommendations of the Maheshwar Prasad Group, implementation of the suggestions have been hesitant and tardy. It will be desirable for the States to re-examine the recommendations in the context of their situation for fast implementation of the recommendations. In particular, we would suggest that programmes of training and re-orientation of personnel belonging to all cadres of services connected with tribal area development may form a part of the curriculam in all entry-training programmes for all Gazetted Officers. Orientation and refresher training programmes for both Gazetted and non-Gazetted officers should be provided to Revenue, Forest, Community and Rural Development, Agriculture, Animal Husbandry, Village and Small Industries, including Sericulture Department field officers. The Tribal Research Institutes and special institutes for training Government personnel may be strengthened to cope up with the training, refresher and orientation-training, requirement.

25. We find that tribal areas continue to face the prospect of scarcity of personnel and unfilled vacancies. The situation does not seem to have improved markedly notwithstanding the measures taken by State Governments so far, as the Report of another Working Group set up by the, Planning Commission on Manpower Requirement and shortages in Hill/ Tribal Areas would show. Prima Facie this would imply that the existing measures of compensation and incentives have not been adequate to persuade government servants' to join duty in tribal areas. The Maheshwar Prasad Group had recommended that in such an event a separate cadre of some selected and scarce services should be build for tribal areas or where a separate cadre is not foreseen to be viable, sub-cadres of the State cadres should be though of. Positions in such cadre or subcadre could be filled up either on the basis of allurement by incentives or through recruitment specifically made to fill up the posts therein. We have no reports to show what action has been taken in the matter, but vacancies in tribal areas continue to exist. We would urge adoption of the recommendation made by the Maheshwar Prasad Group particularly in respect of health and medical cadres. In the

recruitment of field-based functionaries whose cadres are generally regional or district-based, preference should be given to tribal and local persons. They should be put through intensive training programmes.

26. Development of weaker sections of the population should be a full subject in all entry or training management programmes of a State. In case of officers in the forest service and other services in States having sizeable tribal area, tribal development should be a full subject, covering one or two papers.

# Fifth Schedule [Article 244(1)] Provision as to the Administration and Control of Scheduled Areas and Scheduled Tribes

### Part A GENERAL.

- 1. Interpretation.-In this Schedule, unless the context otherwise requires, the expression "State" does not include the [States of Assam 3 [,4 [ Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram.]]]
- 2. Executive power of a State in Scheduled Areas.—Subject to the provisions of this Schedule, the executive power of a State extends to the Scheduled Areas therein.
- 3. Report by the Governor to the President regarding the administration of Scheduled Areas — The Governor of each State having Scheduled Areas therein shall annually, or whenever so required by the President, make a report to the President regarding the administration of the Scheduled Areas in that State and the executive power of the Union shall extend to the giving of directions to the State as to the administration of the said areas.

#### Part B

## Administration and Control of Scheduled Areas and Scheduled Tribes

- 4. Tribes Advisory Council --
  - (1) There shall be established in each State having Scheduled Areas therein and, if the President so directs, also in any State having Scheduled Tribes but not Scheduled Areas therein, a Tribes Advisory Council consisting of not more than twenty members of whom, as nearly as may be, three-fourths shall be the representatives of the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of the State:

Provided that if the number of representatives of the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of the State is less than the number of seats in the Tribes Advisoiy Council to be filled by such representatives, the remaining seats shall be filled by other members of those tribes;

- (2) It shall be the duty of the Tribes Advisory Council to advise on such matters pertaining to the welfare and advancement of the Scheduled Tribes in the State as may be referred to them by the Governor;
- (3) The Governor may make rules prescribing or regulating, as the case may be;
- (a) the number of members of the Council, the inode of their appointment and the appointment of the Chairman of the Council and of the officers and servants thereof;
- (b) the conduct of its meetings and its procedure in general; and
- (c) all other incidental matters.
- 5. Law applicable to Scheduled Areas—
  - (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the Governor may by public notification direct that any particular Act of Parliament or of the Legislature of the State shall hot apply to a Scheduled Area or any part thereof in the State or shall apply to a Scheduled Area or any part thereof in the State subject to such exceptions and modifications as he may specify in the notification and any direction given under this sub-paragraph may be given so as to have retrospective effect;
  - (2) The Governor may make regulations for the peace and good government of any area in a State which is for the time being a Scheduled Area;

In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may-prohibit or restrict the transfer of land by or among members of the Scheduled Tribes in such area;

- (b) regulate the allotment of land to members of the Scheduled Tribes in such area;
- (c) regulate the carrying on of business as money-tender by persons who lend money to members of the Scheduled Tribes in such area;

- (3) In making any such regulation as is referred to in sub> paragraph (2) of this paragraph, the Governor may repeal or amend any Act of Parliament or of the Legislature of the State or any existing law which is for the time being applicable to the area in question.
- (4) All regulations made under this paragraph shall be submitted forthwith to the President and, until assented to by him, shall have no effect.
- (5) No regulation shall be made under this paragraph unless the Governor making the regulation has, in the case where there is a Tribes Advisory Council for the State, consulted such Council. .

# PART C

## SCHEDULED AREAS

- 6. Scheduled Areas—
  - (1) In this Constitution, the expression "Scheduled Areas" means such areas as the President may by order declare to be Scheduled Areas.
  - (2) The President may at any time by order
    - (a) direct that the whole or any specified part of a Scheduled Area shall cease to be a Scheduled Area or a part of such an area;
    - (a) increase the area of any Scheduled Area in a State after consultation with the Governor of that State;
    - (b) alter, but only by way of rectification of boundaries, any Scheduled Area; i
    - (c) on any alteration of the boundaries of a State or on the admission into the union or the establishment of a new State, declare any territory not previously included in any State to be, or to form part of, a Scheduled Area;
    - (d) rescind, in relation, to any State or States, any order or orders made under this paragraph, and in consultation with the Governor of the State concerned, make fresh orders redefining the areas which are to be Scheduled Areas and any such order may contain such incidental and consequential provisions as appear to the President to be necessaiy and proper, but save as aforesaid, the order made under sub>paragraph (1) of this paragraph shall not be varied by any subsequent order.

# PART D

## AMENDMENT OF THE SCHEDULED

- 7. Amendment of the Schedule.
  - Parliament may from time to time by law amend by way of addition, variation or repeal any of the provisions of this Schedule and, when the Schedule is so amended, any reference to this Schedule in this Constitution shall be construed as a reference to such Schedule as so amended. (1)
  - (2) No such law as is mentioned in sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph shall be deemed to be an amendment ot this Constitution for the purposes of article 368.