# **GOVERNMENT CONTRACTS**

## UMAKANTH VAROTTIL<sup>\*</sup>

#### **I. INTRODUCTION**

THE modern State has expanded beyond the realm of customary sovereign functions such as governance. It is now a key player in the commercial arena and engages in myriad activities such as trade and commerce (either as a procurer or supplier of goods and services). It also adopts a larger societal role in the guardianship and distribution of public goods such as natural resources. In doing so, the government is required to enter into contracts of various kinds with individuals and businesses.

This raises the obvious question of whether the government as a contracting party ought to be treated differently from any private contracting party. The dichotomous position that emerges suggests that for contract law purposes the government is akin to any private contracting party, but since the contracting role of the government could potentially put public resources at stake, the Constitution of India carefully circumscribes its exercise of contracting power. Although matters of government contracting might at first blush appear somewhat procedural and formalistic, they have stoked a great deal of controversy lately due to frenetic judicial activity in the field.

The objective of this chapter is to provide an overview of the constitutional position relating to both the formation of contracts and to substantive elements of government contracting. This chapter highlights and discusses the key issues and controversies in these areas, and concludes with some critical analysis and normative observations.

The discussion is divided into parts. Section II relates to the contracting power of the government, which the Constitution vests in it without the necessity of underlying legislation. Section III deals with the formation of contracts to which the government is a party. Being somewhat formalistic in nature, this section considers the circumstances when the government can validly enter into a contract so as to constitute its binding contractual obligation. Section IV deals with substantive aspects as to the manner in which the government arrives at a decision to enter into (or award) a contract with (or to) a specific individual or business. This discussion gives rise to the more contentious issue regarding the nature and extent of judicial review of government contracting. Section V concludes.

#### **II. THE GOVERNMENT'S POWER OF CONTRACTING**

A threshold question from the purview of contract jurisprudence relates to the capacity of persons to enter into a contract. This encompasses not only natural persons, but also juristic persons such as corporations, and even the government. The core capacity or power of the State to enter into a contract can be traced to Article 298 of the Constitution.<sup>1</sup> Viewed from the paradigm of the separation of powers within the State, the contracting function would fall quite naturally within the purview of

the executive rather than the legislature (or the judiciary).<sup>2</sup> While this ought to be a relatively straightforward matter, the constitutional provision was subject to significant debate within the first few years of its functioning.

A controversy arose under the previous version of the Article as to whether the power of the executive can be exercised without owing its existence to underlying legislation.<sup>3</sup> In an early decision, $\frac{4}{3}$  the Supreme Court (hereinafter also referred to as 'the Court') asserted that certain executive actions (in this case the nationalisation of an industry) could not be undertaken unless they were supported by appropriate legislation. This position, however, did not receive support in *Ram Jawaya Kapoor v State of Punjab*, <sup>5</sup> where the Court held that executive action need not always be supported by legislation. It necessitated an amendment to the Constitution that introduced the current version of Article 298.<sup>6</sup> This position provides a flexible and pragmatic approach, as it allows the executive to enter into contracts from time to time without awaiting legislative intervention, and is in tune with the ground realities pertaining to government contracting (that need to be carried out in a timely and efficient manner).

Although no prior legislative basis is necessary for the executive to enter into contracts, such powers are subject to applicable legislation. The scheme under the proviso to Article 298 stipulates that where the subject matter of the contract falls within the legislative competence of any State, the contracting power of the Union executive is subject to such legislation. Similarly, the contracting power of any State's executive is subject to legislation of Parliament on matters where it has the competence to legislate. This scheme provides the requisite balance between Parliament and State legislatures in enabling them to moderate the contracting functions of either the Union or State executives. However, what Article 298 does not expressly cover is the relation of the executive and legislative powers of the States with one another.<sup>7</sup>

Barring the initial debate surrounding the separation of powers between the executive and the legislature, which has since been settled, the essence of the contracting power of the government under the Constitution has been fairly clear. Greater judicial attention has been focused on the manner in which various officers of the government can enter into contracts on its behalf so as to bind it, a matter to which this chapter now turns.

#### **III. THE FORMATION OF GOVERNMENT CONTRACTS**

Juristic persons such as the State (or a corporation) must necessarily act through natural persons. In terms of contract formation, the crucial question arises as to when a contract entered into by a natural person such as an officer of the government with a third party can bind the government to such contract so as to create contractual rights and obligations between the government and the third party. That would essentially depend upon whether the government official is properly authorised to enter into the contract and bind the government. In this background, the Constitution (in Article 299) prescribes a set of formalities to be complied with for government contracts so as to ensure that the government is not saddled with liabilities for unauthorised contracts. <sup>8</sup> While this is somewhat akin to the principles of agency that arise under contract law (or corporate law for officers binding the company), there are important differences as well in the constitutional scheme pertaining to government contracts. This is essentially because in the case of government contracts there are also

matters of public policy intended for the protection of the general public.<sup>9</sup> Given the larger purpose behind it, the somewhat formalistic and procedural requirements of contract formation have attracted significant judicial attention. This section addresses a number of issues that have confronted the Court on contract formation.

## **1. Scope and Ambit of Article 299**

At the outset, Article 299 applies to 'contracts made in the exercise of the executive power of the Union or of a State'.<sup>10</sup> It goes without saying that the formalities of these provisions are applicable to contracts entered into by the executive arm of the government. Statutory contracts are therefore outside the purview of Article 299 and would be governed by the terms of the statute under which they are executed. $\frac{11}{1}$ 

In order to ensure compliance with Article 299, government contracts must satisfy three broad conditions:

- (i) they must be expressed to be made by the President, or by the Governor of the State, as the case may be;
- (ii) they must be executed; and
- (iii) such execution must be on behalf of the President or the Governor by such persons and in the manner as they may direct.<sup>12</sup>

Whether (and how) Article 299 has been complied with in a given case is a mixed question of law and fact.<sup>13</sup> On the one hand, the Court has rendered a strict interpretation of the provision. For example, it is not possible for the government to enter into oral contracts or implied contracts.<sup>14</sup> The fact that they must be reduced to writing introduces greater transparency in contracting decisions, and adds to the public policy goal emanating from this provision. It also introduces an element of objectivity in contract execution on behalf of the government by minimising any scope for uncertainties in the government's contractual obligations. If the government is permitted to enter into oral or implied contracts, then the government could be bound by obligations it did not authorise, which would render the express provisions of Article 299 nugatory.

At the same time, the Court has also sought to temper the rigidity of the constitutional provision by taking into account practical realities, without in any event diluting the public policy goal behind the formalities of government contracting. For instance, a question has arisen as to whether an authorised official can bind the government only through the execution of a formal contract. In *Union of India v* AL Ralia Ram, <sup>15</sup> the Supreme Court held that the constitutional provision does not require a formal document to be executed by the government with another contracting party. A valid contract may emanate from correspondence exchanged between parties, which would conform to the requirements of Article 299.<sup>16</sup>

In sum, while the courts had initially observed strict adherence to the formalities in Article 299, they have also introduced the necessary flexibility by adopting a more pragmatic approach. For example, it has been observed, 'In effect, it may be true to say that judicial view has oscillated between the liberal and the rigid interpretation of Art. 299. $\frac{17}{12}$  Since the matter of compliance with Article 299 is a mixed question of fact, it is suggested that courts must be guided by the policy imperative behind the constitutional provision in examining the issue in a given case, and adopt a purposive interpretation rather than a technical one, keeping in mind the ground realities as well.

## **2. Mandatory Nature of Article 299**

It is a rather settled position of the law that Article 299 is a mandatory provision, and not a directory one. This has been confirmed in a number of judgments of the Supreme Court,  $\frac{18}{18}$  and more specifically elucidated in *State of West Bengal v BK Mondal & Sons*. 19

Consequently, non-compliance with the provision would result in invalidation of the contract entered into by the government. $\frac{20}{20}$  Moreover, given the nature of the provision and the interest sought to be protected, it is not possible to seek or obtain waiver of compliance.<sup>21</sup> A waiver would render the provision, which is considered mandatory, to be inconsequential.

## **3. Consequences of Non-compliance**

Ordinarily, a contract entered into in violation of a legal provision (either in the Constitution or a statute) would be rendered void, or at least voidable. Although this position may seem somewhat obvious, the interpretation of Article 299 underwent a chequered history before a judicial compromise was finally reached.

The difficulty arose due to one of the earliest decisions of the Supreme Court under Article 299. In *Chatturbhuj Vithaldas Jasani v Moreshwar Parashram*, 22 the election of Jasani was challenged on the ground that he was disqualified under the Representation of the People Act 1951 as he was interested in a contract for the supply of goods to the government. Although the Supreme Court held that the contract did not comply with Article 299, it refused to hold that the contract would be void. Hence, the Court upheld Jasani's disqualification. This decision has come under some amount of criticism.<sup>23</sup> Moreover, its applicability has been called into question because in that case the Court was concerned with the question of disqualification under the Representation of the People Act wherein the finding of the Court that the contract was not void related to a collateral purpose.

This incongruity was subsequently put to rest by a constitutional bench of the Court in *BK* Mondal.<sup>24</sup> In that case, it was clarified that in *Chatturbhuj* the Court was merely considering a narrow question as to the effect of a government contract for the purposes of considering the disqualification of a candidate under the Representation of the People Act. $\frac{25}{5}$  More importantly, the Court explicitly stated that the observations or decision in *Chatturbhuj* ought not to be treated as 'supporting the proposition that notwithstanding the failure of the parties to comply with Art. 299(1) the contract would not be invalid'.  $\frac{26}{5}$  Following this course correction, there is considerable support for the proposition that a contract entered into without complying with the procedures set forth in Article 299 would be void. $\frac{27}{2}$  Hence, the government cannot be held liable for damages for breach of such a contract.<sup>28</sup> This is consistent with the public policy surrounding Article 299, which is to prevent the government from being saddled with liability for unauthorised contracts.

Despite the invalidation of a government contract, it is possible for a contracting party to seek to impose obligations on the government using other legal principles. These include the ratification of any irregularity and promissory estoppel. These principles allow an affected third party to assert its rights for lack of compliance with proper governmental procedures, but at the same time they have the effect of expanding the government's contractual obligations.

## a. *Ratification*

Beginning with ratification, under general principles of contract law, it is possible for a person on whose behalf an agent has acted without authority to adopt that act so as to confer authority *ex-post facto*. 29 In such a case, it would be deemed as if the agent had been clothed with authority by the principal at the time the act was performed. In this context, it is necessary to explore whether these contractual principles apply equally to government contracts whose formation is required to be in accordance with Article 299 of the Constitution.

The initial signals from the Supreme Court in *Chatturbhuj* indicated that there was nothing to prevent ratification of the contract by the government, especially if such ratification were for its benefit. <sup>30</sup> However, as discussed earlier, *Chatturbhuj* was decided in the context of collateral matters relating to disqualification in elections, and is therefore arguably confined to its facts.<sup>31</sup> If ratification were permitted, that would go against the grain of the public policy perspective and protection of public funds inherent in Article 299.

An ambiguous position regarding ratification ensued until 1968, when the Supreme Court in *Mulamchand* categorically stipulated that ratification of a contract entered into without complying with Article 299 was just not possible.<sup>32</sup> The Court observed: 'If the plea ... regarding ... ratification is admitted that would mean in effect the repeal of an important constitutional provision intended for the protection of the general public.<sup>33</sup> The present position does not permit ratification in any manner, which is consistent with Article 299 being a mandatory provision whose non-compliance results in a void contract. As a practical matter, in case of non-compliance, the parties have no option but to re-execute the contract by following the requisite procedures. It is not open for the government to simply adopt an existing non-compliant contract merely through ratification.

The impermissibility of ratification altogether is arguably too rigid a dispensation. One possibility could be to look at the manner of ratification of the contracts: if the contract was ratified so as to ensure compliance with Article 299, then it should bind the government. The underlying policy concern is addressed because authority is conferred in the manner required by the Constitution, albeit on an *ex-post facto* basis.

#### b. *Promissory Estoppel*

In case of an invalid contract, it may be possible for a contracting party to assert a right in equity against the government using the principle of promissory estoppel. A right under estoppel would usually be triggered if the government makes some representations to a third party who then acts in reliance upon such representations so as to alter its position.  $\frac{34}{1}$  In such a case, the doctrine would impose liability upon the government. In several cases involving non-compliance with Article 299, contracting parties have sought to invoke estoppel. However, the Court has been rather hesitant to recognise estoppel for government contracts.<sup>35</sup> Similar to ratification, any recognition of estoppel against the government in case of non-compliance with Article 299 would render the constitutional protection under that provision redundant. Given that this is a mandatory provision that results in invalidation of a non-compliant contract, the position seems to shun the operation of promissory estoppel (or similar equitable principles) in government contracting due to the special protective

regime designed in the Constitution.

All of these suggest that non-compliance with Article 299 can be fatal to contract formation, and neither the contractual principle of ratification nor the equitable doctrine of promissory estoppel would come to the rescue of a contracting party that has transacted with the government. In that sense, the public policy preference for protection of public funds trumps any contractual or quasi-contractual protection sought by a third party transacting with the government.

## **4. Remedies to Parties**

Thus far, it has been seen that the provisions of Article 299 are interpreted strictly by the Court that not only renders contracts void for non-compliance with those, but it disentitles contracting parties from invoking other principles such as ratification and promissory estoppel to impose liability on the government. While this adequately protects the government and the broader public interest, it leaves the contracting parties vulnerable due to the lack of any recourse for the time and effort put in to transact business with the government. In order to alleviate some of the severities faced by the contracting parties, the law makes available certain remedial measures to such parties, which restitutes their position. This operates as a balancing factor that enables contracting parties to possess sufficient incentives to transact with the government, but at the same time protects government's liability from unauthorised contracts.

In the case of contracts that are not in compliance with Article 299 of the Constitution, contracting parties may rely upon sections  $65\frac{36}{9}$  and  $70\frac{37}{9}$  of the Indian Contract Act 1872 to recover any benefits that the government may have enjoyed due to the performance of the contracting parties under the noncompliant contract (which is resultantly void). While these provisions of the Contract Act permit contracting parties to recover compensation from the government, the legal principle, which forms the basis of such recovery, is different from the contractual and equitable principles such as ratification and promissory estoppel that were discussed earlier. The restitution principles in the Contract Act operate on the assumption that the underlying contract has not validly come into existence and intervenes to provide recourse to the affected party who has innocently acted in reliance upon such contract. On the other hand, the principles of ratification and promissory estoppel operate on the basis of contractual (or quasi-contractual) obligations that have arisen between the parties where the government's liabilities arise out of performance of such contractual obligations rather than by way of restitution. While the law surrounding Article 299 seems to favour the protection of contracting parties through restitution, it denies contractual or quasi-contractual performance remedies. With this conceptual background, it would be appropriate to consider the manner in which the Court has interpreted this interplay between Indian constitutional law and contract law.

In *BK Mondal*,<sup>38</sup> the Supreme Court considered the applicability of section 70 of the Contract Act to a contract that was invalid due to non-compliance with Article 299 of the Constitution. In order to invoke section 70, the following conditions had to be satisfied:

- (i) that a contracting party must lawfully do something or deliver something;
- (ii) that, in doing so, the party must not be acting gratuitously; and
- (iii) that the beneficiary of the act or beneficiary enjoy the benefit thereof.<sup>39</sup>

The Court held that upon satisfaction of these conditions, the liability of the government to

compensate or make good the contracting party arises. The larger question confronting the Court was whether the remedy under section 70 dilutes the mandatory nature of Article 299. The Court clarified clearly and explicitly that the restitution claim is an alternative one and that it does not relate to a breach of contract. It also noted:

The fields covered by the two provisions are separate and distinct, s. 175(3) deals with contracts and provides how they should be made. Section 70 deals with cases where there is no valid contract and provides for compensation to be paid in a case where the three requisite conditions prescribed by it are satisfied. We are therefore satisfied that there is no conflict between the two provisions. 40

In concluding this section on contract formation, it is clear that through several judicial pronouncements the Court has arrived at a delicate balance largely to protect public interest from unauthorised government contracts, but at the same time to provide some minimal level of protection to contracting parties. Given the larger goals of the Constitution, it is unsurprising that the law leans heavily in favour of protecting the government rather than the contracting party.

Barring some initial complications emerging from the early decision of the Supreme Court in *Chatturbhuj*, the law relating to government contract formation has enjoyed a fair amount of certainty and clarity, with the legal regime aimed at achieving a nuanced position that takes into account all affected interests. The same cannot be said about the ability of the courts to review government contracts, which is an area of the law that has witnessed significant upheavals, to which this chapter now turns.

#### **IV. JUDICIAL REVIEW OF GOVERNMENT CONTRACTS**

In the case of private contracting, parties with the requisite legal capacity are free to enter into contracts, and courts seldom question the wisdom or motivation behind the decision to enter into the contracts. Matters are, however, not as simple in the case of government contracts, primarily due to the public interest element involved therein. Establishment of contractual relationships may not only put public funds at risk, but the manner in which the relationships are established may be subject to public scrutiny given that multiple parties may be vying for the same contract with the government. In such a scenario, the process through which the contracting party is chosen may itself have larger implications. Since contracts are entered into by the executive arm of the government, the obvious question is whether they are subject to judicial review and, if so, to what extent.

The scope of judicial review of government contracting gives rise to fundamental conceptual issues that distinguish it from private contracting. It brings to the fore the tension between freedom of contract and public interest. Freedom of contract (which is generally enjoyed by private parties) is necessary to enable the contracting party to exercise full discretion to strike the bargain that it deems most suitable to its interests. Contrast this with government contracting where such discretion is subject to review by the courts, thereby curtailing contractual freedom. This situation is justified due to the public implications of government contracting, and the varied interests that may be affected thereby. In a competitive scenario, this restrains the flexibility of the government in striking contractual bargains, while private parties are subject to no such limitations. This also raises the broader issue of whether the judiciary is best equipped to turn out a finding on the executive's decision making on government contracts, which are not only complex but require technical and commercial judgments to be made.
Given this varied set of factors at play, it is not surprising that the scope and extent of judicial review of government contracts has captured significant attention of the Supreme Court over the past few decades. This is because the scope of judicial review has been moulded by the courts on an ongoing basis and, as this chapter demonstrates, stretched in different directions. The Court's opinion has oscillated between displaying utmost judicial restraint in government contracts and, on some occasions, exercising significant judicial intervention in the government's contract decision making. Between these two extremes, there appears to be a rational mid-range. The remainder of this chapter surveys the leading judgments of the Supreme Court along this spectrum, and seeks to distil the broad principles that are likely to guide the Court going forward.

Given the elusiveness of a consistent approach on the question of judicial review of government contracts, it is proposed to embark upon a chronological sojourn of the Court's thought process by categorising the developments under three different phases. $\frac{41}{1}$  Within each of these phases, the varying opinions of the Court will be weighed so as to derive the more prominent outcome.

# **1. Phase 1: The Emergence of Judicial Review of Government Contracts (1950– 79)**

During the initial decades of the Constitution, the concept of judicial review of government contracts was non-existent. Governments enjoyed substantial discretion and flexibility in entering into contractual relationships. In the early case of *CK Achuthan v State of Kerala*, 42 the Supreme Court noted that the government had the freedom to choose a contracting party to fulfil contracts, and that an aggrieved party who was not chosen cannot claim discrimination and therefore the protection of Article  $14.\overline{43}$  In that sense, the government's position was similar to that of any private contracting party. This position ensued for a number of years with no apparent concern.

It was only in 1975 that the need to view the government's contracting powers through a different lens emerged, albeit somewhat mildly. In *Erusian Equipment & Chemicals Ltd v State of West* Bengal,<sup>44</sup> the Supreme Court clarified that the executive powers of the State under Article 298 (including to enter into public contracts) is subject to the principle of equality of opportunity under Article 14 of the Constitution. <sup>45</sup> However, it was in *Ramana Dayaram Shetty v International Airport Authority of India* that the Supreme Court expounded on the judicial review of government contracting.<sup>46</sup> Applying principles of administrative law given the expansion of the State's functions, the Court took upon itself the role of stepping in 'to structure and restrict the power of the executive Government so as to prevent its arbitrary application or exercise'. $\frac{47}{1}$  This was extended to the contracting power of the government as well, in view of the fact that the government could wield the significant power of granting and withholding contracts and licences in a manner that would have considerable impact on the lives of individuals and businesses. $\frac{48}{10}$  In stark contrast to its earlier approach, $\frac{49}{2}$  the Court carved out a significant distinction between government contracts and private contracts. It clarified that the government does not enjoy the freedom and discretion of a private party in entering into contracts and that it cannot act arbitrarily, 'but its action must be in conformity with standard or norms which is not arbitrary, irrational or irrelevant'.<sup>50</sup>

The end of Phase 1 marks the culmination of a period when the pendulum swung from almost no judicial review of government contracts to the clear and categorical institution of judicial review to the extent of preventing the government from acting arbitrarily, unreasonably, or in a discriminatory fashion. It is upon the edifice laid in *Ramana Dayaram Shetty* that the Supreme Court further constructed a more nuanced position on judicial review of government contracts in the phase to follow.

### **2. Phase 2: The Era of Measured Judicial Intervention (1980–2011)**

While the 1980s were relatively uneventful in terms of judicial activity in reviewing government contracts, the 1990s turned out to be a prominent decade in chiselling the contours of judicial review. While there was no turning back on the need for judicial review of government contracting, the issue at play was the scope and extent of the review powers. As will be elaborated below, the courts during this period largely exercised caution and intervened to overturn government contracts only when there was strong evidence of arbitrariness or *mala fides*, thereby suggesting a balanced approach between freedom of contract and public interest. Most cases during the period related to the award of tenders by the government or the grant of licences for carrying on specific business activities such as telecom licences. 51

In one of the first few significant decisions during this phase,  $52$  the Supreme Court took cognisance of the dichotomy between the need to confer adequate discretion on the government to enter into contracts so as to enable it to operate in a commercial manner, and at the same time to ensure that decisions are taken bona fide.<sup>53</sup> Perhaps for the first time, the Court delineated the scope and limits of judicial review in government contracting. It clarified that 'by way of judicial review the Court is not expected to act as a court of appeal while examining an administrative decision and to record a finding whether such decision could have been taken otherwise in the facts and circumstances of the case'.<sup>54</sup> Moreover, while performing judicial review, the court is concerned only with the manner in which the government has made the decision to award or enter into a contract, and it cannot extend itself to a scrutiny of the detailed terms and conditions of the contract.<sup>55</sup> This clearly and coherently demarcates the scope of judicial review in a balanced fashion.

In a string of decisions that soon followed, the Supreme Court further clarified the scope of judicial review, and arguably attenuated it. In the significant case of *Tata Cellular v Union of India*, 56 the Court stressed further on its previous line of analysis that judicial review ought to be focused more on the decision-making process rather than the merits of the decision.<sup>57</sup> More importantly, after an analysis of the relevant case law, the court set out its summary as to judicial review of government contracts:

The principles deductible from the above are:

(1) The modern trend points to judicial restraint in administrative action.

(2) The Court does not sit as a court of appeal but merely reviews the manner in which the decision was made.

(3) The Court does not have the expertise to correct the administrative decision. If a review of the administrative decision is permitted it will be substituting its own decision, without the necessary expertise which itself may be fallible.

(4) The terms of the invitation to tender cannot be open to judicial scrutiny because the invitation to tender is in the realm of contract. Normally speaking, the decision to accept the tender or award the contract is reached by process of negotiations through several tiers. More often than not, such decisions are made qualitatively by experts.

(5) The Government must have freedom of contract. In other words, a fair play in the joints is a necessary concomitant for an administrative body functioning in an administrative sphere or quasi-administrative sphere. However, the decision must not only be tested by the application of Wednesbury principle of reasonableness (including its other facts pointed out above) but must be free

from arbitrariness not affected by bias or actuated by mala fides.

(6) Quashing decisions may impose heavy administrative burden on the administration and lead to increased and unbudgeted expenditure.<sup>58</sup>

This crucial decision and summary, which have been relied upon extensively by the Court, exercise sufficient caution against excessive judicial intervention in government contracting. This is especially so given the limitations of judicial review, ranging from the lack of relevant commercial expertise of the Court to the timing and cost of review to the larger adverse impact it may have on cancellation of contract awards and licences. At the same time, the Court has retained sufficient room to intervene in extreme circumstances such as arbitrariness, *mala fides*, or unreasonableness (judged by the Wednesbury principles).

The line of judicial deference to government policy was followed subsequently in *Delhi Science Forum v Union of India*.<sup>59</sup> In the case, which related to a 1994 policy surrounding the award of telecom licences, the Court displayed considerable empathy to the policymakers on economic policy decisions, with the desire to intervene only if there was a violation of a constitutional or statutory provision.<sup>60</sup> The Court also clarified the position regarding the burden of invoking judicial review, by stating that the onus of demonstrating the vitiation of a decision to enter into a contract on any of the recognised grounds vested in the person challenging the decision. Unless the aggrieved party was able to discharge that burden, the courts would hesitate to intervene.

This phase witnessed an overwhelming number of decisions of the Supreme Court relying on the principle of judicial restraint, and intervening only in exceptional cases that attract grounds of arbitrariness, *mala fides*, or unreasonableness. While it is not necessary to discuss all of these cases,  $\frac{61}{1}$  they display the tendency of the Court in favour of restraint rather than intervention in government contracting. This represents a nuanced position that recognises commercial realities in decision making relating to government contracts and the need for freedom, discretion, and flexibility; the element of public interest is protected through the constitutional principle of judicial review when it is called for (in exceptional circumstances). $\frac{62}{6}$ 

Reviewing Phase 2, it is clear that the overarching theme followed by the Court is one of limited judicial intervention. It has restrained itself from intervening in executive decisions pertaining to government contracts unless there is strong evidence of arbitrariness, *mala fides*, or unreasonableness. Even when it has intervened, it has confined its review to the government's decision-making process and shied away from reopening the award of contracts on their merits. During this era, the theme of judicial restraint towards government contracts and economic policy has found a louder voice than judicial intervention. But that status quo was somewhat shattered in the phase to follow.

### **3. Phase 3: Judicial Activism and the Period of Upheaval (2012)**

The year 2012 witnessed a flurry of activity in determining the extent of judicial review of government actions on the specific question of distribution of natural resources by the government among private parties. More specifically, the natural resource was spectrum and the question was its allocation to various private telecom service providers. The background to the judicial activity arose from investigations into corruption against the Minister for Communications, as well as certain

government officials in connection with the award of 122 unified access service (UAS) licences by the Department of Telecommunications (DoT) in 2008.<sup>63</sup> The award of these licences was challenged before the Supreme Court in *Centre for Public Interest Litigation v Union of India* (the *2G* Spectrum case).<sup>64</sup> In a sign of judicial interventionism over executive action, the Supreme Court ordered a cancellation of the 122 UAS licences. The reasoning that formed the basis of the Court's conclusion is wide and expansive, and goes against the grain of previous judicial thought.

The *2G Spectrum* case was concerned with a type of government contracting activity that had become quite prominent in recent decades with the privatisation of various government business activities, particularly in the natural resources sector. In this sphere, previous government monopolies gave way to private participation in the exploitation of natural resources.<sup>65</sup> The Court invoked the public trust doctrine, whereby the State is deemed to have proprietary interest in its natural resources (over which it acts as a guardian or trustee) and which imposes restrictions and limitations on the ability of the State to use and distribute them in any manner as it deems fit.  $\frac{66}{1}$  From a government contracting perspective, it was found that the public trust doctrine 'regulates the rights and obligations of the State vis-à-vis private parties seeking to acquire/use the resource and demands that the procedure adopted for distribution is just, non-arbitrary and transparent and that it does not discriminate between similarly placed private parties'.<sup>67</sup>

Using the public trust doctrine as a springboard, the Court went on to expand the scope of judicial review in such matters. Even though it recognised the boundaries of judicial review as laid down in earlier decisions, <sup>68</sup> the Court held:

[W]hen it is clearly demonstrated that the policy framed by the State or its agency/instrumentality and/or its implementation is contrary to public interest or is violative of the constitutional principles, it is the duty of the Court to exercise its jurisdiction in larger public interest and reject the stock plea of the State that the scope of judicial review should not be exceeded beyond the recognised parameters.<sup>69</sup>

This is an indication of the Court's desire to intervene on matters of government contract and economic policy if it deems necessary in the circumstances of the case, thereby stretching the contours of judicial review far beyond traditional notions.

The expansion of the Court's role in reviewing government contracts or licensing is evident from its intrusive response to government decision making. Choosing to ignore the well-established tenets of judicial review not to intervene in the merits of government decisions, the Court went on to expound as to the manner in which the government must undertake distribution of natural resources. While criticising the method of 'first-come-first-served' in the alienation of natural resources, given its potential for misuse by private participants, who possess an asymmetric informational advantage, it went on to hold that such alienation can occur only through a method of public auction in a manner that maximises financial benefit to the State. $\frac{70}{10}$  In doing so, the Court arguably trespassed into executive territory by becoming prescriptive as to the method by which distribution of natural resources is to occur.

The *2G Spectrum* case not only generated a great deal of consternation among private players in the natural resources sector who were exposed to the risks of uncertainty in judicial review, but it also invited academic critique for the judicial excess in review of government contracting and policy and also for its failure to elucidate its conclusion with rigorous reasoning.<sup>71</sup> The outlying nature of its reasoning and conclusions and the severity of its impact on the government as well as private players gave rise to a Presidential reference under Article 143 of the Constitution that was heard before a

constitutional bench of the Supreme Court.

In *Special Reference No 1 of 2012*,  $\frac{72}{2}$  the Supreme Court performed the fine balancing act of undoing some of the broader ramifications of the *2G Spectrum* case without really reversing or interfering with the judgment as it was applicable to the facts of the case and the 122 UAS licences that were cancelled. What it sought to do was to clarify the ruling of the Court in the *2G Spectrum* case. At the outset, it clarified that the observations in the *2G Spectrum* case relating to auction as the optimal method for alienation of natural resources cannot be taken as a general principle and must be confined to the allocation of spectrum, and that too in respect of the licences that were in question on the facts of the case.<sup> $73$ </sup> While attempting not to offer a complete answer on the applicability of the public trust doctrine, <sup>74</sup> the Court in *Special Reference* categorically stated that auction is not prescribed by virtue of Article 14 of the Constitution to be the only method of distribution of largesse by the government.<sup>75</sup> Moreover, 'a constitutional principle must not be limited to a precise formula but ought to be an abstract principle applied to precise situations'.<sup>76</sup> The Court steadied matters by stating that courts would normally look at executive actions more broadly and would not interfere in the merits of such actions by examining the details. This approach softens the judicial interventionism embarked upon in the *2G Spectrum* case, and restores some discretion and flexibility to the executive arm of the government in entering into contracts and determining economic policy, including on matters such as distribution of natural resources.

Moreover, the Court sounded a note of caution on judicial review. In governmental action such as award of contracts, 'a potential for abuse cannot be the basis for striking down a method as *ultra vires* the Constitution. It is the actual abuse itself that must be brought before the Court for being tested on the anvil of constitutional provisions.<sup>'</sup><sup>77</sup> Similarly, the Court warned against embarking on a comparative analysis of examining various methods available for distribution of natural resources so as to identify the most effective method. $\frac{78}{8}$  That indeed is a matter for the executive, in respect of which courts must exercise restraint.

The combination of the *2G Spectrum* case and *Special Reference* suggests paradoxical outcomes during the course of the same year.<sup>79</sup> While this has caused an upheaval as regards the scope of judicial review of governmental action (including contracts), the end result is somewhat balanced. The effort of the Court in the *2G Spectrum* case to expand the scope of judicial review to make it more interventionist in nature has been balanced out through a more cautious approach adopted in *Special Reference*.

## **4. Evaluating the Legal Position**

That begs the question as to what the current state of law relating to judicial review of government contracts might be. <sup>80</sup> Despite the derailment witnessed in the *2G Spectrum* case, the prominence of judicial restraint has returned, at least partly. The aberration experienced in the *2G Spectrum* case has been largely retraced in *Special Reference*, inasmuch as it has been argued that '[s]ubstantively, the [*Special Reference*] erases [*2G Spectrum* case] from the legal record'. 81 In a series of decisions in the wake of the twin pronouncements discussed above, the Court has continued to display the attitude of judicial restraint, in a manner that adopts the previous position discussed in Phase 2 as the frame of reference.  $\frac{82}{5}$  In that sense, despite the turbulent developments of 2012, calm has prevailed,

with the legal position acquiring greater clarity by reverting to the pre-existing position.

Moreover, in a significant development, the Court in *Manohar Lal Sharma v The Principal Secretary* had occasion to review the position of law emanating from a combination of the *2G Spectrum* case and *Special Reference*. <sup>83</sup> Here, the Court was concerned with the allocation of coal blocks over the period 1993 to 2010. While it reiterated that there is no constitutional mandate to engage in auctions for distribution of natural resources,  $\frac{84}{9}$  on the facts of the case the allocation of coal blocks was found to be arbitrary and illegal. $\frac{85}{5}$  In a subsequent ruling as to the consequences of this finding, the Court cancelled 214 out of 218 coal block allocations made since 1993.<sup>86</sup>

While the resulting scenario may provide little comfort to those seeking clarity and certainty in government contracts, it also offers some valuable lessons. Given that this area of the law is built solely through case law without much constitutional or statutory clarity, the facts of individual cases are likely to play a significant role. The well-known adage of 'hard cases make bad law' cannot be truer than in this scenario. <sup>87</sup> For example, the *2G Spectrum* case involved some extraordinary facts and circumstances, which were coloured by the then public outrage against corruption in public office, wherein the Supreme Court took upon itself the task of addressing some issues that it felt were inadequately addressed by the other arms of the government. This is a classic example of judicial overreach. Although the position on judicial review appears temporarily settled, there is no certainty that egregious circumstances in the future may not elicit wide-ranging responses from the Court that may militate against the broader principle of judicial restraint. Hence, while there is some immediate resolution, an equal degree of uncertainty remains for the future.

It would augur well for courts to be more definitive as to the extent of judicial review. While it is hard to argue against no judicial review at all, the intervention of the courts into matters of government contracting and economic policy must be reserved for the most extreme circumstances as exceptions, rather than as a matter of rule or ordinary practice. The conceptual chasm between government contracts and private contracts is inevitable, but the deviation of government contracts in their subjection to judicial review must be limited to circumstances where they are justified in public interest.

#### **IV. CONCLUSION**

Government contracts are distinct from private contracts as they are subject to greater scrutiny in public interest. This scrutiny takes two forms. One is more formal in nature, and considers the power of the government to enter into contracts (Article 298) and the process that has been followed to authorise the contracts and enter into the same (Article 299). The constitutional provisions on this score are amply clear and the case law surrounding them has been largely consistent in recent years. The second type of scrutiny is more substantive in nature. Undertaken entirely by the judicial arm of the government, in exercise of its broader constitutional mandate under Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution, the power of judicial review confers substantial powers on the courts. The separation of powers under the Constitution is subject to intense testing with the judiciary seeking different approaches in reviewing executive action in contracting, which ranges from judicial restraint to wide-ranging judicial interventionism. While the Court has been predominantly adopting the approach of restraint, with limited review in case of the existence of specific grounds (such as arbitrariness, *mala fides*, or unreasonableness), it has occasionally whipped up a storm by exceeding its traditional