# **INTER-STATE TRADE, COMMERCE, AND INTERCOURSE**

### ARVIND P DATAR

#### **I. INTRODUCTION**

PART XIII of the Indian Constitution comprises Articles 301 to 305 and deals with 'Trade, Commerce and Intercourse within the territory of India'. This Part, more than any other, is fundamental to the federal structure envisaged by the Constitution. It is often forgotten that the elimination of inter-State trade barriers is essential to the economic unity of the country. The main focus of this chapter is to highlight the contentious topic of compensatory taxes, which, as matters currently stand, has been referred to a bench of the Supreme Court that is likely to comprise nine or eleven judges.

The legislative history of Part XIII has been set out in some detail in the minority judgment of Sinha CJ in the *Atiabari* case.<sup>1</sup> Similarly, one may also refer to the majority judgment of Gajendragadkar  $J^2$ . Briefly, the object was to eliminate trade barriers between different States that would form independent India. Past experience showed that a large number of native Indian States, which claimed sovereign rights within the limits of paramount power, imposed levies that created customs barriers and this led to Section 297 of the Government of India Act 1935, which read as follows:

Prohibition of certain restrictions on internal trade—(1) No Provincial Legislature or Government shall—

(a) by virtue of the entry in the Provincial Legislative List relating to trade and commerce within the Province, or the entry in that list relating to the production, supply and distribution of commodities, have power to pass any law or take any execution action prohibiting or restricting the entry into, or export from, the Province of goods of any class or description; or (b) by virtue of anything in this Act have power to impose any tax, cess, toll or due which, as between goods manufactured or produced in the Province and similar goods not so manufactured or produced, discriminates in favour of the former, or which, in the cases of goods manufactured or produced outside that Province, discriminates between goods manufactured or produced in one locality and similar goods manufactured or produced in another locality.

(2) Any law passed in contravention of this section shall, to the extent of the contravention, be invalid.

#### In the Constituent Assembly, Sir BN Rau prepared the first draft of what would eventually become Article 301:

Subject to regulation by the law of the Union, trade, commerce and intercourse among the units, whether by means of internal carriage or by ocean navigation, shall be free:

Provided that any unit may by law impose reasonable restrictions thereon in the interest of public order, morality or health.<sup>3</sup>

### Rau adapted this clause from Article 92 of the Australian Constitution and his draft report was filed on 3 April 1947. On 27 October 1947, Rau presented a more elaborate draft to the Drafting Committee:

Subject to the provisions of any Federal law, trade, commerce and intercourse among the units shall, if between the citizens of the Federation, be free:

Provided that nothing in this section shall prevent any unit from imposing on goods imported from other units, any tax to which similar goods manufactured or produced in that unit are subject, so, however, as not to discriminate between goods so imported and goods so manufactured or produced:

Provided further that no preference shall be given by any regulation of trade, commerce or revenue to one unit over another: Provided also that nothing in this section shall preclude the Federal Parliament from imposing by Act, restrictions on the freedom of trade, commerce and intercourse among the units in the interest of public order, morality or health or in case of emergency. 4

In the end, Articles 301 to 305 were incorporated in our Constitution and, as the text reveals, they were far more detailed than these previous draft provisions. Part XIII evolves an integrated policy and the Founders seem to have kept three main considerations in mind. First, in the larger interest of India there must be free flow of trade, commerce, and intercourse, both inter-State and intra-State; secondly, regional interests must not be altogether ignored; and thirdly, the Union must have the power to intervene in case a crisis arises in any part of India.<sup>5</sup> According to the Supreme Court, 'the declaration contained in Part XIII of the Constitution is against creation of economic barriers and/or pockets which would stand against the free flow of trade, commerce, and intercourse'.<sup>6</sup> Article 301, read in its proper context and subject to the limitations prescribed by other relevant articles in Part XIII, must be regarded as imposing a constitutional limitation on the legislative powers of Parliament and the State Legislatures. Article 301 applies not only to inter-State trade and intercourse but also to intra-State trade, commerce, and intercourse. The freedom of trade guaranteed by Article 301 is 'freedom from all restrictions except those which are provided by the other articles in Part XIII'. 7

It is worth noting that the freedom of inter-State and intra-State trade is not a fundamental right and cannot be enforced under Article 32.<sup>8</sup> Most cases under Articles 301 and 304 deal with the impact of tax laws and regulatory measures on inter-State trade and commerce. These laws will be struck down if they 'directly and immediately restrict or impede the free flow or movement of trade'.<sup>2</sup> The Supreme Court has held that sales tax is not a compensatory tax or regulatory measure, and if the levy of sales tax discriminates between goods of one State and goods of another, it will offend Article 301 and will be valid only to cases within the terms of Article  $304(a)$ .<sup>10</sup> A number of cases have struck down levies that discriminate between products made in one State and another.<sup>11</sup> At the same time, granting special exemption from sales tax in favour of new units for a specified period has been held not to violate Articles 301 and 304.<sup>12</sup> Keeping these aspects of the overall legal position in mind, this chapter will focus on the controversial topic of compensatory taxes—a topic that has defined the Indian constitutional experience on inter-State trade, commerce, and intercourse.

### **II. THE COMPARISON WITH AUSTRALIAN LAW**

Before we move to an examination of the Indian constitutional position, it is important to compare the Indian framework with the Australian one. Indian judges and lawyers frequently resort to the comparison with Australia, and so it is necessary to consider its usefulness. The language of Article 301 is based on Section 92 of the Commonwealth of Australia Constitution Act 1900, although the latter, as reproduced below, is more elaborate than its Indian counterpart:

Trade within the Commonwealth to be Free—On the imposition of uniform duties of customs, trade, commerce and intercourse among the States, whether by means of internal carriage or ocean navigation, shall be absolutely free.

But notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, goods imported before the imposition of uniform duties of customs into any State, or into any Colony which, whilst the goods remain therein, becomes a State, shall, on thence passing into another State within two years after the imposition of such duties, be liable to any duty chargeable on the importation of such goods into the Commonwealth, less any duty paid in respect of the goods on their importation.

The scope of Section 92 has been the subject of intense contestation in Australian courts. Indeed, one Chief Justice of the High Court of Australia bemoaned that when he died, Section 92 would be found written on his heart.<sup>13</sup> Did the word 'intercourse' include non-commercial intercourse? Was banking outside the ambit of the expression 'trade, commerce and intercourse'? Did Section 92 apply only to the buying and selling of goods? These are only some of the controversies that have plagued Australian courts.

While Article 301 is based on Section 92, the similarity ends there. Section 92 is not followed by a number of provisions that are similar to Articles 301 to 305. Further, the powers of legislation of the individual States of Australia are far less than the powers of legislation given to the States in India under Lists II and III of the Seventh Schedule to the Indian Constitution. Given that the textual structure of Part XIII is substantially different from Section 92 of the Australian Constitution, it would be inappropriate to interpret the provisions of our Constitution based on the judgments of the High Court of Australia or the Supreme Courts of various Australian States.

Further, the word 'intercourse' in Australia has been held to include non-commercial intercourse and the question arises as to whether such a view can be adopted in India. $\frac{14}{1}$  On a plain reading of Article 301, it is seen that the word 'intercourse' follows the words 'trade' and 'commerce'. If the Article was intended to grant freedom only to trade and commerce, what was the necessity of using the word 'intercourse' as well? It will be incorrect to limit the word 'intercourse' only to commercial activity because the intention of Part XIII is to ensure free trade, commerce, and intercourse within the territory of India. Indeed, Subba Rao J made a passing observation that Article 301 would include non-commercial intercourse.<sup>15</sup> It is significant that the word 'intercourse' was used in 1901. What was its meaning at that time? What do we mean by the phrase 'uniform duties of customs' used in Section 92?

The dissenting view of Hidayatullah J in the *Automobile Transport* case contains an excellent account of the history of Section 92. One common thread in all the decisions of the Supreme Court has been that although Article 301 of our Constitution has borrowed the language of Section 92 of the Australian Constitution, the overall constitutional framework in India and Australia is very different. As Hidayatullah J put it, 'Indeed, they differ in so many respects that nothing is more dangerous than to suppose that the Indian Constitution wished to secure freedom of trade, commerce and intercourse in the same way as did the Australian Commonwealth.<sup> $16$ </sup>

Hidayatullah J also pointed out that the situation in India was the 'converse' of that in Australia. While 'several independent units joined together in Australia to form a federation to evolve a Union government, in India the transition was from a highly centralized Government to a federation of States which were made autonomous units'.<sup>17</sup> There was a 'classification of subjects between the Centre and the Provinces, and the topics of legislation, taxation and administration were separated to distinguish the different spheres'.<sup>18</sup> These provisions were made in Section 45A of the 1915 Act, which also provided for the Devolution Rules and Schedules, which were the 'precursors of the Lists under the Government of India Act, 1935 and the present Constitution'.<sup>19</sup> 'The only difference' was the absence of a Concurrent List, but this was unnecessary as all residual power was with the Centre.<sup>20</sup> Hidayatullah J also noted that the reforms of 1919, which introduced a system of local government, resulted not in decentralisation but in 'de-concentration' as known in France.<sup>21</sup>

The importance of caution in relying upon foreign decisions, especially within the domain of federalism, was emphasised by Sir Maurice Gwyer of the Federal Court. He believed that:

[T]here are few subjects on which the decisions of other Courts require to be treated with greater caution than that of federal and provincial powers, for in the last analysis the decision must depend upon the words of the Constitution which the Court is interpreting; and since no two Constitutions are in identical terms, it is extremely unsafe to assume that a decision on one of them can be applied without qualification to another. $22$ 

Venkatarama Aiyar J, of the Indian Supreme Court, expressed a similar sentiment some years later, referring specifically to the care with which comparisons between Section 92 of the Commonwealth of Australia Constitution Act and Article 301 of the Indian Constitution must be made.<sup>23</sup> As the Privy Council observed, the words 'absolutely free' used in Section 92 were limited:

As a matter of actual language, freedom in section 92 must be somehow limited, and the only limitation which emerges from the context and which can logically and realistically be applied is freedom at what is the crucial point in inter-State trade, that is at the State barrier.<sup>24</sup>

The expression 'trade and commerce' used in Section 92 simply covers 'all commercial arrangements of which transport was the direct and necessary result'.<sup>25</sup> Upon reviewing the applicability of Section 92 the Privy Council emphasised two general conclusions, which have been cited with approval by the Indian Supreme Court:

(i) that regulation of trade, commerce and intercourse among the States is compatible with its absolute freedom, and (ii) that Section 92 of the Australian Constitution is violated only when a legislative or executive act operates to restrict such trade, commerce and intercourse directly and immediately as distinct from creating some indirect or inconsequential impediment which may fairly be regarded as remote. 26

These confirm the limited guidance it can provide for interpreting the trade, commerce, and intercourse clauses in the Indian Constitution.

## **III. THE 'COMPENSATORY TAX' CONTROVERSY**

The major legal controversy in India with regard to Articles 301 to 304 is around the concept of 'compensatory tax'. In 1961, a five-judge bench of the Supreme Court in *Atiabari* dealt with the scope of Articles 301 and 304.<sup>27</sup> Within six months the correctness of this decision was referred to a larger bench of seven judges, which delivered the judgment in *Automobile Transport*. <sup>28</sup> The former bench introduced, for the first time, the concept of 'compensatory tax' and this spawned further concepts like proportionality, equivalence, and so on. The concept of compensatory tax was not only erroneous but also unnecessary. Unfortunately, no commentary on the Constitution of India has considered the two High Court judgments from Assam and Rajasthan that eventually led to the decisions by the five- and seven-judge benches. The Supreme Court, in both *Atiabari* and *Automobile Transport*, failed to ask the right questions. The concept of compensatory tax led to a series of errors and gave State Legislatures almost unbridled power to levy taxes and justify them on the ground of being compensatory. Over the years, decisions of the Supreme Court on this topic have muddied the waters, and no clear principle has emerged. Accordingly, in 2008, a division bench of the Supreme Court referred the controversy surrounding compensatory taxes for hearing by another constitutional bench.<sup>29</sup> The bench of five judges in turn referred the matter to an even larger bench, and it is now likely that the case will be heard by a bench of nine or eleven judges.  $\frac{30}{10}$  This bench, whenever it is constituted, will face a range of issues that are examined in detail below.

In 2010, a Supreme Court bench of five judges in *Jindal*  $\frac{31}{2}$  took the view that the Court should 'revisit' the tests propounded in *Atiabari* and *Automobile Transport* because in the earlier decisions some key matters were ignored, and the Court applied the rulings of *Keshav Mills <sup>32</sup>* and *Central Board of Dawoodi Bohra Community*. <sup>33</sup> The Court noted that ten questions had been referred to a constitutional bench in  $2008, \frac{34}{3}$  and, without specifically stating that further questions need to be referred, the Supreme Court set out the aspects that required reconsideration by a larger bench. While these questions touch upon a wide range of matters, they fail to ask the two most important questions: (i) whether the concept of 'compensatory tax' has legal basis; and (ii) whether such a concept, even if legal, is necessary.

It is submitted that the concept of 'compensatory tax' has no place in Indian constitutional law. Articles 301 to 305 have been well drafted and the validity of any levy or regulatory measures can and should be decided on the basis of a literal reading of these provisions. As we shall see, the Assam and Rajasthan levies were not found to cause any impediment to trade or commerce before the respective High Courts, and they should have been upheld on that ground alone.

### **IV. THE** *ATIABARI* **RULING**

The controversy over compensatory taxes began with Section 3 of the Assam Taxation (On Goods Carried by Roads or Inland Waterways) Act 1954, which read as follows:

Subject to the provisions of this Act and with effect from such date as the Government may, by notification appoint, being not earlier than thirty days from the date of the said notification, (a) manufactured tea in chests carried by motor vehicle, cart, trolley, boat animal and human agency or other means except railways and airways shall be liable to a tax of one pice per pound of such tea and this tax shall be realized from the producer; (b) jute carried in bales by motor vehicles, cart, trolley, boat animal and human agency or any other means except railways and airways, shall be liable to a tax of eight annas per maund of such jute which shall be realized from the dealer.

Apart from Section 3, Sections 4 and 5 provided for charging tax on the net weight, which had to be determined in a prescribed manner. Thus, the tax at the rate of 1 paisa (or pice) per pound of tea and 8 annas per maund of jute was payable on the net weight. The number of kilometres or miles over which tea or jute was transported was not relevant. This tax was challenged before the Assam High Court, and the case was heard by a special bench of three judges (the law reports use the expression 'special bench' rather than 'full bench'). 35 It was argued that the levy was *ultra vires* of Article 301, as it had the effect of interfering with the freedom of trade, commerce, and intercourse—the tax interfered with the transportation of tea from Assam to Calcutta. Further, tea, being a controlled industry, came within Entry 52 of List I of Schedule VII. The Union government alone could regulate the manufacture, production, supply, and distribution or transportation of tea and also fix the price of tea. A reference was made to the Tea Act 1953 and it was urged that the status of the tea industry was within the control of the Union. It was also contended that the tax on the carriage of goods by road/inland waterways was, in reality, an excise duty which was within the exclusive domain of the Union government under Entry 84 of the Union List; that the Act was violative of Article 14 as it taxed only tea and jute but no other commodities (further, it taxed only manufactured tea in chests and not manufactured tea in other containers); and that the impugned tax was not within the ambit of Entry 56 of List II of Schedule VII. The law was, thus, a colourable piece of legislation as it sought to levy a tax on trade and commerce which was not distinguishable from excise duty; under the guise of legislating under Entry 56, excise duty, a central levy, was being imposed. It was urged that the levy would not fall under Entry 56 because: (a) it taxed only goods and not goods and passengers; (b) the incidence of tax further fell on the producer and not on the carrier as intended by the entry—the tax, in substance, was an excise duty or tax even before the first stage; (c) it was not a tax for the use of the roads, as the levy was on the basis of the net weight and regardless of the distance traversed; (d) there was a conflict between the preamble and the title on the one side and the charging section on the other. The two final contentions before the Court were that the Act infringed Article  $19(1)(g)$ ; and that Article 301 was subject only to Part XIII and to no other part of the Constitution. Consequently, the imposition of tax necessarily interfered with the freedom of trade, commerce, and intercourse as mentioned in Article 301.<sup>36</sup>

It is clear from these submissions that there was no argument on behalf of the State that the tax would be justified, as it was a regulatory or compensatory measure. There was no plea that the Act required the consent of the President under Article 304(b). Significantly, no material was placed before the court to show how this levy was excessive or in any manner interfered with trade and commerce in tea or jute.

The special bench of the Assam High Court observed that cases under Section 92 of the Australian Constitution would not apply because Article 301 did not have overriding attributes. The Chief Justice further observed that the imposition of a tax covered by Entry 56 of List II did not interfere with the freedom of trade, commerce, or intercourse. If this argument was accepted, he held, many taxes that the State Legislature was authorised to levy would have to be declared as unauthorised on the ground of interference with trade or commerce, and sales tax would be a permanent casualty. The Chief Justice held that Part XIII may not be subject to the other parts of the Constitution, but that did not necessarily mean that the other parts, must, therefore, be subject to Part XIII of the Constitution. The Constitution was in the nature of an organic whole and one must interpret it in a manner so as to harmonise its various parts and not to make them conflict with each other.

The separate judgment of Ram Labhaya J was more detailed. It carefully considered the scope of Section 3 and the nature of the tax that was levied. It also considered the challenge under Article 301 of the Constitution. With reference to the commerce clause in Article 1 of Section 8(3) of the US Constitution as well as Section 92 of the Commonwealth of Australia Constitution Act, Labhaya J held that the expression 'commerce', as understood in the US and Australia, could be followed in the context of Article 301 without any difficulty. Thereafter, the learned judge has discussed the impact of Articles 302, 304, and certain entries of the legislative Lists. Finally, Ram Labhaya J stated that 'the crux' was the issue whether the tax imposed on the carriage of goods (tea and jute) was a restriction on the freedom of trade or commerce within the meaning of Article 301. The question was to determine what it was that the 'trade, commerce, or intercourse' was to be *free from*. Is the freedom partial or total? Does it include freedom from taxation, which may indirectly affect the freedom of trade and commerce by reason of the financial burden it necessarily imposes?

After discussing the scope of Articles 246, 265, 276, 286, 287, and 288 as well as Section 92 of the Australian Constitution, Labhaya J observed that a tax or a pecuniary burden could restrict the freedom of trade and, in fact, could be the most effective method of restricting the freedom of trade and commerce without saying so. Therefore, if a tax had the effect of indirectly restricting or prohibiting trade or commerce, it would be colourable. Taxing entries were not designed to restrict or prohibit trade or commerce and if the power of taxation was utilised to achieve something that could not be achieved directly, it may be hit by Article 301. Therefore, taxation was not free from the
mischief of Article 301. However, taxation per se would not abridge or curtail the freedom under Article 301. It was only when taxation had the effect of curtailing freedom of trade and commerce that it would be hit by the provisions of Article 301. It was also observed that there was no plea that any appreciable value of trade had been affected injuriously by the operation of the Act.

The decision of the Assam High Court was appealed against and heard by a bench of five judges in the historic *Atiabari* case. <sup>37</sup> Speaking for the majority, Gajendragadkar J held that:

It is hardly necessary to emphasise that in dealing with constitutional questions courts should be slow to embark upon an unnecessarily wide or general enquiry and should confine their decision as far as may be reasonably practicable within the narrow limits of the controversy arising between the parties in the particular case. $38$ 

Remarkably, Gajendragadkar J proceeded to ignore his own warning. The five judges embarked on an unnecessarily wide and general inquiry, instead of confining their decision to merely deciding whether the Assam levy violated Article 301. Significantly, it was not the case of the petitioners that the levy was excessive or had the direct or immediate effect of impeding trade. The *Atiabari* case, as pointed out later in *Automobile Transport,* revealed three views, which could be categorised as the wide view, the narrow view, and the middle ground. The judgment of Shah J represented the wide view, whereby it would have been virtually impossible to levy tax or impose reasonable restrictions and was rightly rejected by the seven judges. $\frac{39}{2}$  The narrow interpretation led to the view that taxing laws were governed by Part XII of the Constitution and except Article 304(a), none of the other provisions of Part XIII extended to taxing laws. This view was also rejected by holding that taxing provisions were not excluded from Part XIII.<sup>40</sup> It would be incorrect to hold that Part XIII applies only to legislation in respect of entries relating to trade and commerce. However, the Supreme Court observed that regulatory measures and compensatory taxes were excluded from the purview of Part XIII of the Constitution. In view of the subsequent decision in *Automobile Transport*, it is not necessary to discuss the *Atiabari* case in detail. However, it is interesting to note that Mathew J held that *Automobile Transport* 'practically overruled' the decision in *Atiabari,* insofar as it held that if a State Legislature wanted to impose taxes to raise monies to build roads, it would only be done after obtaining the sanction of the President under Article  $304(b)$ .<sup>41</sup> This would virtually put the State Legislature at the mercy of the executive at the Centre.

In the end, by a margin of 4:1, the Supreme Court in *Atiabari* held that the levy was invalid because the assent of the President had not been taken under Article 304(b). This was a ground that was never urged before the Assam High Court. Similarly, the observations regarding regulatory and compensatory taxes were unnecessary and have, over the years, resulted in a huge loss of judicial time. Despite this, the per se test laid down by the Supreme Court in *Atiabari* appears correct.

### **V.** *AUTOMOBILE TRANSPORT* **AND THE RAJASTHAN LEVY**

Section 4 of the Rajasthan Motor Vehicles Taxation Act 1951 imposed taxes at different rates on different kinds of vehicles and, effectively, no vehicle could be owned or used in Rajasthan without paying the appropriate tax. Section 11 provided for penalties for non-compliance with the provisions of the Act. These two sections were challenged on the ground that they infringed the freedom of trade, commerce, and intercourse granted under Article 301 of the Constitution. The levy was also challenged on three further grounds: that the Act had not obtained the previous sanction of the President under the proviso to Article 304(b); that this defect had not been remedied by obtaining subsequent assent under Article 255; and that, on the basis of the decisions under Section 92 of the Australian Constitution, the levy of the tax was also *ultra vires* of Article 301 because this Article was based on Section 92. The State of Rajasthan responded to these arguments by contending that if the tax was levied under the powers of the State Legislature under Article 245 of the Constitution, the levy would not offend Article 265. The State further argued that a law imposing a tax cannot be declared to be invalid on the ground that it offends Article 301.

As in the High Court of Assam, this case was also heard by a full bench. $\frac{42}{1}$  The High Court proceeded to decide the case on the impact of the tax on motor vehicles on individuals and nonindividuals. As far as individuals were concerned, it was pointed out that the right to move freely was conferred under Article 19(1)(d) and right to carry on business was given by Article 19(1)(g). Both rights were subject to reasonable restrictions under Articles 19(5) and 19(6), and assuming that the tax amounted to a restriction, if it was reasonable, it would not be fettered by Article 304. While Article 19 referred to individuals, Article 301 would be affected only if there was a direct and immediate restriction on the movement of goods. It was held that a tax could be considered as an impediment only if it was so high that it would 'kill trade and commerce'. $\frac{43}{12}$  The High Court then examined the rates of tax prescribed by Section 4 read with relevant Schedules. It compared the total collection of tax on motor vehicles with expenditure on new roads and maintenance of old roads and found that this tax approximately met 50 per cent of such expenditure and, consequently, the levy of taxation did not amount to imposing unreasonable restrictions on the freedom guaranteed under Articles 19(1)(d) and 19(1)(g). For example, the tax for a car with a five-person seating capacity came to Rs 60 per year, and this would not be violative of Article 301 as any impact on trade and commerce was only indirect. Thus, the full bench held that taxes could affect Article 301 only if they were exorbitant. Although the phrase used was 'kill trade and commerce', it does seem that even if taxes do not meet this standard they would certainly be struck down if they caused serious impediment to the free movement of goods.

This case was then taken up to the Supreme Court. At that time, doubts were raised on certain observations in the *Atiabari* case and the appeal from Rajasthan was heard by a bench of seven judges.<sup>44</sup> We can see that the concept of compensatory tax was never considered by the High Court. This expression was first coined in the *Atiabari* case and further explained by the Supreme Court in the *Automobile Transport* case. Das J held that a compensatory tax, in reality, facilitates trade and commerce and does not constitute a 'restriction'; 'compensatory taxes are no hindrance to anybody's freedom as long as they are reasonable  $\ldots$  <sup>145</sup> He also pointed out that Article 301 would not affect regulatory measures such as licensing regulations for vehicles. Das J went on to state that compensatory taxes should not be patently more than the facilities that are provided. $\frac{46}{10}$  In other words, it was contemplated that compensatory taxes must have a correlation with the improvement or increase in trade. If the tax levied was disproportionate to the benefit, it would violate Article 301 as it was not compensatory. Indeed, Das J propounded a working test to decide whether a tax was compensatory:

[A] working test for deciding whether a tax is compensatory or not is to enquire whether the trades people are having the use of certain facilities for the better conduct of their business and paying not patently much more than what is required for providing the facilities.<sup>47</sup>

This test, however, appears unworkable. It raises a range of questions. For instance, who decides

what facilities are meant for 'better conduct' of business? What is meant by not paying 'patently more' than the amount required to provide the facilities? Suppose the taxes are collected for improving facilities over a five-year period, does one have to wait until the facilities are in place and then decide whether they have indeed resulted in better conduct of business? Further, the theory of compensatory tax is fundamentally flawed. A tax is a compulsory exaction and there is no obligation on the part of the State to explain what specific activity it is meant for. Taxes have to be applied for a public purpose under Article 282. The very nature of a tax is that it is not correlated to a particular activity. This was recognised by Chinnappa Reddy J, who observed that a tax under Entry 56 will be compensatory, but such tax need not satisfy the principle of proportionality because that would render a compensatory tax indistinguishable from a fee. $\frac{48}{3}$  This once again leads to a paradox. The compensatory tax, according to Reddy J, does not have to be proportionate to the facility. But this is contradictory to the requirement in the *Automobile Transport* case, where the payment should not be patently much more than that required for the facilities.

From 1962 to 2006, most of the cases concerned entry tax and motor vehicles tax. The case law has been discussed at length by Kapadia J in the *Jindal* case. 49 In *Bhagathram Rajeevkumar*, the Supreme Court had noted that the theory of compensatory tax was widened, and eventually it was held that if the taxes had 'even some link' between the tax and the facilities extended to dealers 'directly or indirectly', the tax could not be challenged. <sup>50</sup> Soon after, *Bihar Chamber of Commerce* held that even if there was 'some connection' between the tax and the trade facilities that were extended to the dealers directly or indirectly, the tax could be characterised as a compensatory tax. There was no burden on the State to furnish the details of facilities provided to traders.<sup>51</sup> These decisions were characteristic of the extreme reluctance of the Supreme Court and High Courts to declare even patently unconstitutional provisions of tax laws as invalid. This reluctance is clearly discernible after 1978. Eventually, Kapadia J in *Jindal*, speaking for the bench, held that the views held in *Bhagathram Rajeevkumar* and *Bihar Chamber of Commerce* were erroneous and were thus overruled. According to Kapadia J, the 'some connection' test laid down in *Bhagathram Rajeevkumar* was 'not only contrary to the working test propounded in *Automobile Transport* case but it [obliterated] the very basis of compensatory tax'. This was because 'when a tax is imposed ... as a part of regulatory measure the controlling factor of the levy shifts from burden to reimbursement/recompense'.  $52$  The bench, however, further compounded the confusion by introducing the 'principle of equivalence'.  $\frac{53}{2}$  Strangely, this principle was said to be the converse of the 'principle of ability to pay'.<sup>54</sup> The Supreme Court has consistently tried to point out the difference between 'fees' and 'compensatory tax' whilst holding that both had to be proportionate to the facilities provided.<sup>55</sup> Such judicial reasoning makes little sense.

Kapadia J held that a statute must 'facially or patently' indicate the 'quantifiable data' on the basis of which compensatory tax is levied.<sup>56</sup> If the Act does not have such indication, the burden is on the State to place adequate materials before the court. But typically no statute can indicate the quantifiable data, and it is only when the State Government is called upon to file its affidavit before the Court that these details will become available. Therefore, the burden will invariably be upon the State Government to place adequate material before the High Court or the Supreme Court.

# **VI. UNRESOLVED QUESTIONS**

As noted above, the Supreme Court has now referred twelve questions to be answered by a larger bench of nine or eleven judges. Incredibly, neither *Atiabari* nor *Automobile Transport*, nor any subsequent case, has paused to consider what the original dispute before the Assam and Rajasthan High Courts was about. The questions have now been framed to clear the unnecessary controversy created by the Supreme Court itself. The following are the major issues involved in the questions that are now pending before the Court.

## **1. Article 304(a) and (b)**

One major question is whether State enactments relating to levy of entry tax have to be tested with reference to both clauses (a) and (b) of Article 304 of the Constitution for determining their validity, and whether clause (a) of Article 304 is conjunctive with or separate from clause (b) of Article 304. (Entry tax is a tax on the movement of goods. If goods are manufactured in a State in a local area and therein consumed, they are unlikely to go outside the local area. Therefore, entry tax is levied only when there is a movement of goods *into* that local area. Under the Constitution, there cannot be any bar to the entry of goods in any State; this will immediately fall foul of Article 301 unless such bar satisfies the requirements of Article 304(b).)

Clearly, State enactments levying entry tax will have to satisfy the requirements of Article 304(a). If the tax on goods within a State directly impedes trade, it will be saved only under Article 304(a). However, if the tax is levied on goods that are imported and not on goods manufactured or produced in the State, the protection of Article 304(a) will not be available; it will not be saved by any other article. If the entry tax that is levied on goods manufactured within the State is lower than the tax applicable to goods imported from other States, it would directly violate Article 304(a). The words 'any tax' used in clause (a) must apply to entry tax as well. Thus, the levy of entry tax has to be nondiscriminatory to satisfy Article 304(a).

At the same time, even if entry tax is non-discriminatory but is so excessive as to amount to an unreasonable restriction on the freedom of trade, it would be violative of Article 301. Importantly, the levy of an entry tax that is not excessive will not be a restriction on the freedom of trade, commerce, or intercourse, just as the levy of a sales tax or purchase tax does not impose such a restriction. The power of taxation given to the State legislature can always be exercised and will be independent of Article 304(b).

Article 304(b), however, should be understood as having no application to the levy of taxes. The expression 'reasonable restriction' does not apply to the power of the State Government to levy tax in exercise of the legislative powers under the relevant entries in List II. Therefore, any Bill or amendment connected with tax will not come within the meaning of Article 304(b). In other words, Article 304 can be bifurcated into two components: taxes which are of the type mentioned in clause (a); and other restrictions, unrelated to tax, that fall under clause (b). If this interpretation is not accepted, the taxing powers of the State legislature will be subject to the previous sanction of the President. If the President withholds the sanction, the tax cannot be levied or increased. It will be an intolerable burden for a State Government to seek previous sanction of the President for amendments to its taxing statute.

Articles 304(a) and 304(b) are *conjunctive* in the sense that they enable State legislatures to enact two types of laws that are exempt from Article 301 or 303. As mentioned above, first, they confer on

State Governments the power to levy non-discriminatory taxes even if these result in restriction or hindrance to the free movement of goods. The second power is to impose other reasonable restrictions that are required in public interest. At the same time, the fields covered by these two clauses of Article 304 are completely different. The former applies to taxes and the latter to regulatory and other measures.<sup>57</sup>

The interpretation given to Articles 301 to 304 in the *Atiabari* and *Automobile* cases will apply to entry tax only to a limited extent. The observation in the *Atiabari* case, that the imposition of tax on carriage requires the sanction of the President under Article 304(b), is not correct. Since a tax law that is valid under Article 304(a) need not satisfy 304(b), *Atiabari* is to this extent clearly erroneous. As mentioned above, Article 304(b) does not apply to taxes but only to regulatory measures. If a tax on vehicles is discriminatory, it will be violative of Article 304(a) provided that discrimination is between vehicles manufactured in one State and those imported from other States. Similarly, if the levy of entry tax is highly excessive, it will violate Article 301.

### **2. Entry 52, List II, and Article 301**

A second major question is whether the imposition of entry tax levied under Entry 52, List II, is violative of Article 301. If this is so, the question arises whether such levy can be permitted if the entry tax is compensatory in character and, if this is in turn so, what tests must apply to determine the compensatory character of the entry tax.

The imposition of entry tax under Entry 52 of List II of the Seventh Schedule would violate Article 301 only if it is non-discriminatory and so excessive as to result in serious hindrance to inter-State or intra-State trade. Even if entry tax is levied in a particular local area, the rates cannot be so excessive as to result in the destruction or serious erosion of trade and commerce. Further, even if a tax is 'compensatory', it cannot be so excessive as to destroy trade. For example, entry tax on the entry of diesel for consumption within a local area cannot be fixed at Rs 200 per litre and then justified on the ground that the resources are going to be used for laying super-highways or to provide sophisticated trade facilities within that local area. It has been submitted that the concept of compensatory tax is erroneous. However, even assuming it to be correct, the amount that is levied for provision of any facility must not only be proportionate or satisfy the principle of equivalence, but also the tax cannot be so exorbitant or excessive as to annihilate trade or commerce.

Does the entry tax collected have to be spent within the local area in which it is collected even though the collection of the entry tax has been credited to the Consolidated Fund of the State? There is no reason why we should suppose a requirement that the tax levied and collected under any of the entries in List II must be spent in a particular manner. There is nothing to compel a State to spend taxes only in those local areas where it is collected. For instance, a few local areas within a State may be highly prosperous and there is no bar on that State Government from levying entry tax in these prosperous areas (where, in all probability, there is a higher amount of trade and commerce) and then using the tax collected for the development of other economically backward local areas. Once the tax is compensatory, it is sufficient if facilities or services are provided within any local area. Entry tax, being a tax, need not satisfy the principle of equivalence. It is submitted that the legislative power to levy taxes must be harmoniously construed with Part XIII. Taxes, if they are reasonable, will not be violative of Article 301 if they incidentally affect trade and commerce.

Another issue to note is that, while under Entry 52 tax can be levied on the entry of goods into a local area, this does not mean that the tax must be levied only at the border of the local area. If the goods have entered the local area to be temporarily stored in a warehouse for subsequent removal, entry tax cannot be levied. The mandatory requirement is that the goods must have come into the local area either for consumption, use, or sale in that local area. Therefore, once the goods have come in and are unlikely to be removed out of that area, entry tax can be levied. However, it is open to the State Governments to levy entry tax at the border and then refund it if the goods are merely in transit or have been removed subsequently. It is equally permissible to levy entry tax only at the time of their consumption, use, or sale in that local area.

### **VII. CONCLUSION**

Articles 301 to 304 are clear and must be interpreted on a plain reading of the language used in Part XIII. It is advisable not to refer to foreign decisions, such as decisions under Australian law, as the codified provisions therein are quite different. Further, there is no ambiguity in Articles 301 to 304 the proper test will be to examine any impugned tax or regulatory measure and determine whether it impedes the free flow of goods or services. If it is a law imposing any tax, it must stand up to the scrutiny of Article 304(a). If the law imposes any other restriction, it must satisfy the requirements of Article 304(b) read with the proviso thereto. Thus, it may not even be necessary to answer the twelve questions that have been referred to the larger bench of the Supreme Court. Indeed, every case from *Atiabari* onwards can be decided without recourse to the concepts of compensatory taxes or regulatory measures. The entire controversy can be put at rest by simply following the plain language of Part XIII and determining, in individual cases, whether the impugned provisions are valid or not. In the end, it is hoped that the controversy that began with *Atiabari* is finally laid to rest, and the concept of compensatory tax is buried forever.

<sup>7</sup> *Atiabari* ([n](#page-11-0) 1) [42]. See also *State of Bihar v Harihar Prasad Debuka* (1989) 2 SCC 192 [13].

<sup>8</sup> *Ram Chandra Palai v State of Orissa* AIR 1956 SC 298.

<sup>2</sup> Atiabari ([n](#page-11-0) 1) [50]. See also Amrit Banaspati Co Ltd v Union of India (1995) 3 SCC 335 [8]; State of Bihar v Bihar Chamber *of Commerce* (1996) 9 SCC 136 [11]; *Geo Miller & Co (P) Ltd v State of Madhya Pradesh* (2004) 5 SCC 209 [6].

<sup>10</sup> *Firm ATB Mehtab Majid and Co v State of Madras* AIR 1963 SC 928.

 $\frac{11}{2}$  H Anraj v Government of Tamil Nadu (1986) 1 SCC 414; India Cement [\(n](#page-11-2).6); Weston Electroniks v State of Gujarat (1988) 2 SCC 568; *West Bengal Hosiery Association v State of Bihar* (1988) 4 SCC 134.

<sup>12</sup> *Video Electronics (P) Ltd v State of Punjab* (1990) 3 SCC 87. See also Arvind P Datar, *Commentary on the Constitution of India* (2nd edn, LexisNexis 2007) 1677–80, 1691.

<sup>22</sup> *Re Central Provinces and Berar Sales of Motor Spirit and Lubricants Taxation Act 1938* (1939) 1 FCR 18, 38. See also *Province of Madras v Messrs Baddu Paidanna and Sons* (1942) 4 FCR 90.

24 *James v Commonwealth of Australia* [1936] UKPC 52, 70.

<sup>26</sup> *Automobile Transport* (n 13) [10], citing *Commonwealth of Australia v Bank of New South Wales* [1949] UKPC 37.

<span id="page-11-0"></span><sup>1</sup> *Atiabari Tea Co Ltd v State of Assam* AIR 1961 SC 232 [9]–[11].

<sup>&</sup>lt;sup>2</sup> Atiabari (<u>[n](#page-11-0) 1</u>) [32]–[34].

<span id="page-11-1"></span><sup>3</sup> B Shiva Rao, *The Framing of India's Constitution: A Study* (Indian Institute of Public Administration 1968) 699.

 $\frac{4}{1}$  Rao (<u>[n](#page-11-1) 3</u>) 701.

<sup>5</sup> *Jindal Stainless Ltd (2) v State of Haryana* (2006) 7 SCC 241 [6].

<span id="page-11-2"></span><sup>6</sup> *India Cement v State of Andhra Pradesh* (1988) 1 SCC 743 [11].