# Chapter 6

## Empowerment: Forms, Limitations, and Assertions

The idea of political empowerment is quite new. As a reality, however, it is as old as the system of democracy or populism. Democracy is, after all, regarded as the rule of the people, by the people, and for the people. Similarly, populism aims to give more space and rights to the people. Empowerment is thus linked with equality, liberty, and fraternity. Hence, even liberation struggles against colonial rule may be seen as a step in the direction of empowerment. In the colonial context, the demand for empowerment may be traced to the demand for greater participation by natives in government and later in the struggle for liberation. It is, of course, a different matter that subsequent gains resulting from this demand were monopolized by native elites, as was the case in India. No doubt, the powers granted to natives during the colonial period constituted a process of empowerment, but this was of a limited nature. Power was, after all, not within the reach of subaltern people. Post-independence India broadened the scope of power-sharing for the people. Yet people's participation has fallen far short of popular expectations and aspirations. It has remained confined to the level of formality. As far as actual control is concerned, ordinary people have very little say and a limited role to play. This situation has led to a demand for an increased share in power, both economic and political. It is hardly surprising that increasing demands for political power are being made, especially by the disadvantaged, namely workers, peasants, women, youth, dalits, and tribes. Since it is not possible to address here the issue of empowerment of such diverse categories of people, an attempt has been made in this chapter to discuss the issue of the empowerment of tribes in India.

In sociological literature, the notion of power is used broadly in two senses. One is in the sense in which Weber used the term, and the other is in the sense in which Parsons employed the term. To Weber, power is an

opportunity for an individual or a group of people to realize their own will through communal action, even against the resistance of others. Power in this sense is an aspect of social relationships, and hence power invariably means exercising power over others. According to Parsons, power is conceived of as a general facility or resource meant for the use or good of society. The more a society is able to mobilize it, the more power it will have at its disposal. In Parsons's frame of reference, power is seen primarily as a general capability to be used only by society.

In the context of tribes, what is implied by the term empowerment is something that has been going on for quite some time. I am interested here in locating the various forms that this process has taken and to understand the notion of power that these have entailed. I am also interested in the implications that these had for the tribes insofar as their relationships with non-tribes were concerned. Empowerment may be discussed both as a process and as a product. Insofar as tribes control and enjoy some power, the measures, however inadequate, may be conceived of as products. They may be seen also as processes insofar as they constitute stages or strategies in the larger process of the greater empowerment of the tribes.

## Disempowerment Process

The issue of empowerment in India has arisen in two contexts. The first is the context of the traditional social structure as manifested in the caste system, which was both hierarchized and had a built-in structure of social inequality and social injustice. Disempowerment here is thus linked with the lack or absence of power. Empowerment here means conferment of certain rights that the groups did not have earlier. Conferment of rights on groups or communities that are ranked low in the caste hierarchy may be seen as evidence of the empowerment process (Béteille 1999). The second context in which the disempowerment process is located is not the context of the lack or absence of power, but the context of the appropriation and seizure of power. Here groups and communities held and enjoyed power, but this power was appropriated by groups or communities that came from the outside. Whereas the former was the case with caste society, the latter was more the case with tribal societies. Thus, in the case of tribes, the issue of their empowerment can be understood more meaningfully only in relation to the process of their disempowerment.

The process of disempowerment in the case of tribes began with the incorporation of the tribes into the larger social structure, especially the state. The incorporation was slow and gradual before the coming of the British. The consequences arising out of such a process were not intensely and violently felt or experienced by the tribes, although this did lead to the imposition of certain obligations on them. This meant that it was not incorporation as such that led to the process of disempowerment but the nature of the incorporation that took place. Where incorporation was marked by the seizure or appropriation of power by an agency from the outside, it invariably led to the disempowerment of the tribes. Disempowerment was of a higher or lower order depending on the nature of power at the disposal of the tribes. The incorporation that occurred during the British period was of this nature. The power held over the tribes and non-tribes by the British stemmed from the superior power—technological, military, and economic—that they held vis-à-vis the tribes. The disempowerment process was thus brought about, to begin with, by the use of brute physical force; there was nothing legitimate about it. This was checked during the later period of British rule, but it did not disappear entirely. The characteristic feature of domination and subjugation, enforced by the use of power, had far-reaching and unprecedented consequences for the tribes. This led to a strong reaction in some quarters. Elwin, for example, went to the extent of advocating a policy of complete isolation for the tribes. This appeared to him to be the only way of stopping the process of disempowerment that was at work during the period (Elwin 1944). Interestingly, in the post-independence period, until very recently, hardly any sensitivity was shown to the disempowerment processes at work among the tribes. Attention was paid to general social backwardness and low level of development of the tribes, given their geographical and physical isolation. The whole thrust of development policy in the decades after independence was to integrate tribes into the larger social structure or the so-called mainstream (Ray 1972). Hence, development of the tribes in the post-independence period moved along the same lines as those in the colonial period, with one exception—it was pursued much more

aggressively in the period after independence. Correspondingly, the process of disempowerment that had been at work in the colonial period continued in the post-independence period. Not only that, the process also assumed enormous proportions after 1947, to which the Indian state itself contributed in no small measure.

This occurred mainly because of the imperatives of national and regional development. Tribal development could not be pursued outside the parameters of national development. Indeed, measures for bringing about rapid national development—such as building infrastructure, setting up industries, constructing dams and power projects—were seen as important steps for achieving the integration of tribal society. The national objective of building productive infrastructure for future growth and resource mobilization was seen as far more important than the issue of tribal welfare. Indeed, more often than not, the policy of national development was at odds with the policy of tribal interest and welfare, and the latter was invariably sacrificed in the name of national development.

The most important impact of the various programmes of national development was that they drastically altered the relationship of the tribes with the natural environment and its resources, namely land, forest, and minerals. Traditionally, these resources were either individually or collectively owned. The tribes at least had usufructuary rights over these. But because of the measures adopted by the state in the colonial period and later in the post-independence period, there has been a steady erosion of the control over and use of these resources by the tribes.

Land and forest are the resources that have affected the lives of tribal groups most deeply. The erosion of tribal land rights began under British rule and administration. It was brought about by a combination of forces at work during the colonial period. Of these, the two most important were the introduction of private property in land and the penetration of market forces in tribal areas. The two taken together opened up the way for large-scale alienation of land from tribes to non-tribes, especially after the tribal areas came to be linked with the larger society by roads and railways. The mechanisms through which this was achieved were fraud, deceit, coercion, and debt bondage, the latter being used most widely. Despite many protective and even restorative measures taken to stop land alienation in the

post-independence period, there has been little success. Of course, the major source of land alienation in the post-independence period is not so much the encroachment of non-tribal people into tribal areas as the development policy followed by the Indian state. Large-scale industrialization, exploitation of mineral resources, and construction of irrigation dams and power projects in tribal areas during the period have uprooted more people from their lands than all the other factors put together.

Tribes experienced changes not only in their relationship to the land but also in their relationship to the forest. Tribes were greatly dependent on forests for their day-to-day needs, such as food, shelter, tools, medicine, and even clothing. But as long as the tribes were in control of forests, in the sense of having unrestricted use of forests and forest produce, they had no difficulty in meeting their needs. In turn, they preserved the forests, as this was their life-support system. The entry of the British drastically altered this relationship. To the British, forests were an important source of revenue and commercial gain. Hence, the forest policy adopted by the British introduced state control over forest resources and curtailed tribal rights and privileges over forest resources. The policy pursued by the British was continued in the post-independence period, focusing on economic development with even stricter regulation and enforcement. All these actions were justified on the ground that they were necessary for advancing wider and national public interest. In addition to affecting the rights of tribal communities, the forest policy and its enforcement had other consequences. It led to the steady depletion of forest areas. In 1854, the year that the first forest policy was adopted, the area under forests was estimated to be 40 per cent of the country's territory. In 1952, it was estimated to be only 22 per cent. Forest cover was estimated to have declined further to 10 per cent of the country's total area by the 1980s (Fernandes 1996).

As has been noted above, tribal areas witnessed large-scale industrialization, extraction of mineral resources, and development of infrastructure such as power projects, irrigation dams, roads, and railways. These have contributed to the increasing industrialization, urbanization, and economic diversification of tribal regions. Yet these developments have been of little benefit to the tribes. The industries and other development

projects that have come up have not made jobs available to them. Even where they could have been absorbed, people from outside the region have been preferred over the tribal people. Tribes were thrown off their land and denied access to resources, leading to their displacement on a very large scale. Although this problem had begun to manifest itself in the first decade after independence, attention has been paid to only now. Further, benefits arising out of power and irrigation projects have not reached the tribes. Few tribal villages have been electrified, and tribal land under irrigation is almost negligible. Again, despite the urbanization of tribal areas, the percentage of tribal people living in urban areas is very small. In short, the fruits of development have not gone to the tribes but to people from outside. They find themselves increasingly subjected to poverty, exploitation, and oppression. In fact, these have become the marked features that characterize tribal communities in India, at least in regions outside the north-east. These being the general features of tribal societies at large, it is not surprising that they have come to be described as the fourth world in social science literature (Sengupta 1982).

## Empowerment Process

The kind of concern expressed by Elwin during the British period finds more resonance today than ever before. But a way out of this problem today has not been thought of in terms of isolation but empowerment. Ironically, the very state that has been at the root of the disempowerment of tribes has also made certain provisions for their empowerment.

The Constitution, for example, contains many provisions for the benefit and welfare of tribal people. These constitutional provisions include creating scheduled tribal areas by bringing areas inhabited by tribes under the Fifth or Sixth Schedule of the Constitution according special treatment in the administration of tribal people; granting statutory recognition; providing proportional representation in Parliament and state legislatures; imposing restrictions on the right of ordinary citizens to move about freely or settle in particular areas or to acquire property in them; encouraging conservation of tribal languages, dialects, and culture; and extending special privileges in the form of the reservation of a certain percentage of posts in government services and seats in educational institutions. In addition, tribal

people also enjoy protection under the fundamental rights meant for all citizens. Similarly, the Directive Principles of State Policy require that the educational and economic interests of the weaker sections of society, including tribes, be especially promoted. In short, the Constitution aims at safeguarding, protecting, and promoting the interests of tribal people.

It may be stated at the outset that there has been no formal statement of policy regarding tribes in India. Yet it would not be correct to say that there has been no state policy concerning tribes at all. A policy does exist, but it remains dormant and can only be inferred. Indeed, it is in the interest of the state that the policy remains unstated and nebulous. This gives the state an advantage in manipulating and taking measures that may be contrary to the welfare and interest of tribal people without being noticed or detected by the public. If one were to examine the constitutional provisions more carefully, one would see that the Constitution clearly adopts a position favouring tribal integration rather than isolation or assimilation, without using the term and concept of integration even once. Indeed, there is no official document where the policy of integration finds an explicit formulation. Yet this is what goes in the name of tribal policy in India. Of course, this is not without reason if one were to take into consideration the provisions made in the Constitution.

Integration as against assimilation (total fusion) and isolation (maintaining a distance) entails incorporation and acculturation into the larger society, but not at the cost of the tribes' own identity and distinct way of living. Yet there has been a big gap between theory and practice in the implementation of this policy. Policy and ideology stand at one end, and practice and programme at the other. If one were to examine the practice, one would discover that the policy was not one of integrating tribes but one of assimilating them into the so-called mainstream. It is indeed difficult to identify even a single programme under implementation that aims at fostering and promoting the distinct identity of tribal people in India except for those living in the north-eastern region. Nevertheless this fact, the idea of empowering tribes in theory could not altogether be ruled out. That tribes could not take advantage of the provisions in the Constitution and law or translate them into actual practice is a different story and constitutes the other side of the story of the empowerment or disempowerment process.

It is keeping in mind this backdrop that the state's agenda concerning the tribals needs to be examined and understood. The different measures adopted for the welfare of tribal people are usually divided into three categories. These are protective, mobilizational, and developmental. Protective measures include constitutional and legislative rights that safeguard the interests of the tribes (Roy Burman 1994). Mobilizational measures refer to the reservations extended to tribes in different fields. The developmental measures include programmes and activities aimed at promoting the welfare of tribal people. It is to this last aspect of the state agenda that scholars have paid the most attention.

#### Protective Measures

The process of tribal empowerment has a longer history than one may realize at first; it began during colonial rule. As noted earlier, the process of tribal empowerment is intimately related to the process of tribal disempowerment. Since the disempowerment process has become endemic in tribal society, any measure aimed at arresting such a process may, in a very general sense, be taken as evidence of the empowerment process. Some measures were negative in character, in that they did not confer any rights on the tribes but instead imposed restrictions on the rights of nontribes. One such measure was the Scheduled District Act, 1874, in effect in certain parts of British India. Under this act, the operation of general acts and regulations in effect in other parts of British India was restricted in the areas described. The stated aim of this act was to protect tribals from the twin dangers of land alienation and indebtedness. In this way, tribes were protected from the greed of non-tribes. Some measures were positive in character, in the sense that they conferred rights on the tribes. For example, the Chhotanagpur Tenancy Act, 1908 and the Santhal Parganas Tenancy (Supplementary Provisions) Act, 1940 gave some rights to tribes aimed at protecting their land from being alienated.

Measures aimed at tribal protection and welfare during the colonial period were few and limited. However, as noted earlier, there has been a proliferation of such measures in post-independence India. Parliament and state legislatures have enacted further legislation in the same direction. Stricter laws have been adopted with a view to protecting tribal people.

These rights, then, are seen as a sort of power granted to the tribes. Armed with this power, tribes are now able to protect and safeguard their interests. Most of the provisions for tribal protection adopted during the colonial period were of this nature. This has also been the most prevalent form of tribal empowerment in post-independence India.

No doubt, these rights gave tribes some power over non-tribes, particularly in relation to their land, by imposing restrictions on the power of non-tribes. It is a different matter that all tribes may not have had land. What is important is that these rights limited the scope of power enjoyed by non-tribes by treating it as illegal and therefore illegitimate. However, the grant of such rights has been of little use to the tribes as far as their actual enjoyment is concerned. These rights were aimed at helping tribes in exercising actual control over their life and resources. Yet this did not happen. The tribes continued to lose control over their land and other resources, a fact that can hardly be disputed. There were many reasons for the ineffective use of these powers by the tribes. To begin with, although the tribes were given rights, they were given these rights without any corresponding powers to enforce them. Although an agency to enforce these rights existed, enforcement was tardy mainly because of a lack of will on the part of the enforcement agency. Both the executive and judicial authorities were indifferent and insensitive to the rights of tribal people. In addition, the tribes themselves had very little say in these institutions. They continued to be dependent on the benevolence and zeal of sympathetic officials. Not only that, but there have been occasions when the rights conferred have been withdrawn under pressure from non-tribes. The legislatures that conferred such rights also made it a point to take away such rights when they found this to be inconvenient.

The Andhra Pradesh (Scheduled Areas) Land Transfer Regulation, 1959, as amended in 1970, for example, aimed at the prevention of land transfer from tribes to non-tribes. Any transfer of land under the regulation was to be considered null and void. However, this provision was withdrawn through a government notification in 1979 mainly under pressure from nontribes. As per this notification, all non-tribals who were in occupation of lands in the scheduled areas up to 5 acres of wet land or 10 acres of dry land should not be evicted under the regulation of 1959. Thus, in spite of the act

of restoration in effect since 1959, as many as 751,435.66 acres of land were still in the hands of non-tribals by 1995. Similarly, the Kerala Scheduled Tribe (Restriction on Transfer of Lands and Restoration of Alienated Lands) Act was included in the Ninth Schedule of the Constitution for fear of being challenged in a court of law. Yet the act has not gone unchallenged. The act was repealed by the Kerala Restriction on Transfer by and Restoration of Lands to Scheduled Tribes Bill, 1999. However, it failed to get the assent of the President. Following this, the state legislature passed the act under agricultural land, which comes under state jurisdiction of the constitution. The Kerala High Court nullified the act and the matter is now subjudiced (Bijoy 1999; Rao 1996; Verma 1990).

## Mobilizational Measures

As noted above, one of the reasons why the rights could not be effectively enjoyed was because the tribes had very little say in the administration that affected their lives. One way in which this problem could have been overcome was by ensuring their involvement and participation in the organs of the state that were charged with the responsibility of implementing these rights. Yet it is not certain if it was believed that the presence of the tribes in the state institutions would help them in protecting their interests and rights. Of the constitutional provisions pertaining to reservation, two are of special significance. One is the provision of the reservation of seats in Parliament and state legislatures, and the other is the reservation of jobs for tribes in government and semi-government services. The extension of reservation provided an opportunity for tribes to participate in the decision-making processes of the state, both at the legislative and executive levels. They participated in the activities of Parliament and the state legislatures in enacting rules and regulations affecting society at large. All this was made possible by providing reservation to the tribes in the legislature and in government services. However, while this gave them access to state power, giving them a say in the decision-making processes of the state, they had very little say or power as far as their own communities were concerned. They had few rights in shaping or determining the life of their own communities. This was mainly for the following reasons. First, despite the provision of reservation, there were too few tribal representatives in the

state institutions who could safeguard the interest and welfare of the tribes. Second, even when they were available, this did not necessarily give them access to power at levels where the interest and welfare of the tribes mattered the most. Third, because of both internal and external constraints, tribes had little room to exercise power or authority in the interest of their fellow tribes or communities.

The process of empowerment insofar as it gave tribes access to participation in the state structure also weakened the moral claim or authority that they had so far held on land and resources under their territories. Instead, it extended legitimacy to the state's claim for control over land and resources that the tribes themselves had earlier controlled and managed. Tribes were empowered by the endowment of one set of rights, namely share in state power, but were disempowered by losing their claim over land and resources that had been under their control so far. The state gave rights of one type but took away those of another kind. Indeed, in the absence of the extension of such rights to tribes, the state would have had no moral and legitimate claim over the lands and territories inhabited by the tribes and its resources. In fact, state action in the event would have seemed immoral, illegitimate, and unjustifiable. In the end, if one were to do a cost– benefit analysis of the gains made by the tribes, on the one hand and the state on the other the balance would surely go in favour of the state. In return for political empowerment (a share in the state decision-making process) that the state extended to tribes, it took away economic empowerment that they had held so far over the territories in which they lived.

Reservation of seats in Parliament and state legislatures and reservation of jobs in government services, especially for the unprivileged, has generally been seen as one of the important aspects of the general process of empowerment. Since empowerment entails some dimension of power, as noted above, one is tempted to ask questions about the notion of power that may be associated with the provision of reservation. No doubt, it extends some rights—and thereby some power—to the unprivileged. In this instance, it is not a case of giving power to the tribes at the cost of the nontribes. Rather, it is an attempt to ensure the effective distribution of state power among citizens. Given this, the notion of power entailed in the case

is far from clear. It certainly does not fall within the Weberian framework. In the present context, there is hardly a case of power being exercised over others. Tribes, for example, do not hold power at the expense of others. Hence, empowerment through means such as reservation does not necessarily mean a loss of power for the non-tribes. In this context, power may thus more meaningfully be understood as a facility or resource placed at the service of the tribes.

## Developmental Measures

The other kinds of measures adopted by the state for tribes were developmental. Such measures had, of course, nothing to do with power or rights. All the same, the gains made under such measures could have gone a long way towards the realization of these rights. However, these measures contributed little in that direction. This was because all constitutional and legal measures for empowerment, and those that existed at the level of protection and mobilization, were thrown to the winds. Hence, the development policy pursued by the state led to the increasing disempowerment of the tribes in terms of access to resources that they had so far enjoyed. The notion of undertaking development as part of Panchshila remained only an idea. The principles underlying Panchshila as enunciated by Nehru were the following. People should develop along the lines of their own genius, and we should avoid imposing anything on them. Tribal rights in land and forest should be respected. We should try to train and build a team of tribal people to do the work of administration and development and avoid introducing too many outsiders into tribal territories. We should work with and through, and not in rivalry with or against, their social and cultural institutions. We should judge results not on the basis of the amount of money spent but on the basis of the quality of human character evolved (Elwin 1960). Unfortunately, such a philosophy of development for the tribal people was never translated into reality except in a limited way in the north-eastern region. In the region, Panchshila found concrete expression in the institution of the district council to begin with and with the state structure at a later stage.

Institutional Structure

In view of the above, empowerment in the context of tribes has assumed new meaning today. It is true that empowerment is being talked about increasingly in the sense of granting more and more power to tribes. Yet empowerment is not being talked in the sense of more legal rights or reservation in state institutions, but in the sense of institutional mechanisms or granting power to the people whereby they are able to exercise greater control over their own lives. In the context of the tribes, this means power to control their own resources and to determine and regulate their own lives according to their own needs. This means power may be vested either in traditional social institutions or in new institutions created specifically for this purpose. Empowerment here entails power in both the Weberian and the Parsonian senses.

Empowerment even in this sense of the term is not new. One can find traces of this in the Indian Constitution. It may be recalled that there is a provision of the Sixth Schedule areas in the Indian Constitution. The Sixth Schedule contains provisions in relation to the administration of tribal areas. Tribal areas in the Constitution meant regions inhabited by tribes in the state of Assam. Today, most of this region has been carved into separate states, indicating thereby the further process of empowerment of the tribes.

## Autonomous District/Regional Council

The provisions under the Sixth Schedule purport to provide a self-contained code for the governance of tribes living in the Sixth Schedule areas. The avowed objective of the Sixth Schedule is to ensure the grant of autonomy and self-management rights to the tribes. In short, it provides for the institutions of the autonomous district and the autonomous regional councils. The scheme of administration was almost wholly based on the recommendations of the North-East Frontier Tribal and the Excluded Areas Sub-Committee of the Constituent Assembly. The committee was set up to report to the Constituent Assembly on the scheme of administration of the tribal areas. The scheme that was conceived was based on the need for establishing an autonomous administration in these areas so that tribal people could continue to follow their traditional ways of life and to introduce changes that they themselves desired.

The separate scheme of administration was accepted on three considerations. First, the social customs and social organizations of tribal people were distinct from those of non-tribal people. Second, it was feared that tribal people would be exploited by non-tribal people on account of the latter's superior organization and experience in business. Third, it was also feared that unless suitable financial provisions were adopted or powers conferred on local committees, the provincial government would not set apart adequate funds for the development of tribal areas under pressure from the plains people (JHADC 1997).

The councils have thus been given powers equivalent to those exercised by a state or union. They have three wings—legislative, executive, and judicial. They have been given powers to make laws in matters connected with social customs, land, forests, etc. They have also been given judicial and regulatory powers in such matters as control of money-lending and trade by non-tribals and establishment of village and town committees. They also enjoy executive powers in such matters as establishing and managing primary schools, dispensaries, markets, fisheries, ferries, village roads, bridges, footpaths, playgrounds, community halls, etc. They have also initiated measures for better health, medical, and sanitation facilities for the areas under their jurisdiction (Roy Burman 1997; JHADC 1997). In view of the powers vested in the councils, tribes in the north-east have been able to protect themselves from the exploitation of non-tribals to a far greater extent than the tribes in other regions.

#### Creation of New States

Despite the fact that the autonomous district council granted some powers to tribes determining many aspects of their life, these powers suffered from certain limits. There were two reasons for the limited powers of the district council. The first reason was the limited powers given to the district council in the first place. We have already discussed how power was given to the district autonomous council. The second—and main—cause of the limited powers of the district council was the actual politics of the state of which the tribal regions are a part. State-level politics was characterized by a deep divide between tribes and non-tribes, or between the plains people and the hills people. As noted above, state-level politics was dominated by the nontribes, who were numerically dominant and socially and economically powerful. Not only did they tend to dominate the tribes but the politics they followed also tended to thwart and scuttle the functioning of the autonomous district council by blocking grants and creating other impediments (Roy Burman 1997).

The district councils thus experienced a variety of difficulties in the exercise of the power conferred on them. To begin with, law-making power in general was constrained by the fact that until assent was given by the governor, the law promulgated by the district council could have no effect. At the same time, while the district council demanded that the governor should exercise his discretion in the matter, judicial pronouncements suggest that the governor is to be guided by the advice of the ministry. Only through a recent constitutional amendment has an exception been made in respect of the district councils of Karbi Anlong and the North Cachar Hills. Over and above this, the power to make rules is expressly limited by the provisions of the Sixth Schedule that has created them, and, therefore, they can do nothing beyond the powers given to them. The district council can exercise executive functions in respect of several matters listed in the Sixth Schedule. Yet it is not mandatory under the Sixth Schedule to vest any development function with the district council. At best, the concerned state government may, with the consent of the district council, assign development functions to it. However, the state government has not been as liberal in making the district council functionless or in putting it under suspension, initially for six months but usually for the period to be extended by fresh notification. The sources of revenue of the district council or of the regional council have been specified in the Constitution, but some major sources of revenue are under the control of the state government. The latter is expected to pass on the share of the council after due computation, which sometimes takes years. In Assam, the district councils today enjoy the privilege of being represented at the discussions of the Planning Commission along with the government of Assam. They obtain specific allocations and funds from the Planning Commission. But these funds have to be routed through the government of Assam. It is alleged that even these funds are not released in time. Given the fact that many state governments are in the habit of drawing an overdraft, one should not be surprised at the

temporary or even the permanent diversion of funds by them. An important fact to note is that some of the revenue-raising powers of the autonomous district council in the Sixth Schedule areas are less than the powers actually granted to even the gram panchayat in the non-tribal areas of some states. Thus, the role and functions of the district council have fallen short of the expectations of the tribal people in the region (Roy Burman 1997). The demand for a separate state emerged out of this situation. The creation of new states for the tribes was the culmination of the demand for greater empowerment of tribal people.

## Gram Sabha

This demand for greater empowerment has spread to other parts of tribal India and has led to the creation of new institutions, such as an autonomous regional council for the Bodos as well as for the tribes of Jharkhand. It has also taken the form of the revival of old institutions such as the gram sabha. Indeed, the power, control, and jurisdiction exercised by the gram sabha earlier have now been given legal recognition by an act of Parliament. It may be recalled that the 73rd and 74th Amendments to the Constitution stipulated that the provisions contained therein will not apply automatically to the scheduled areas covered by the Fifth and Sixth Schedules. These were to apply only with such modifications and amendments as Parliament may decide. As a follow-up to this provision, the Ministry of Rural Development, Government of India set up a high-level committee to recommend the contents of a parliamentary act for the Fifth Schedule areas. Based on the report of the high-level committee, the Panchayat Extension to the Scheduled Areas Act (PESA), 1996 was passed by Parliament in December, 1996.

The most important provision made in this act is that state legislation on the panchayat would be in consonance with customary law, social and religious practices, and traditional management of community resources. This means that the village would ordinarily correspond with the community, managing its affairs in accordance with traditions and customs. Every village would have a gram sabha, consisting of persons whose names are included in the electoral rolls for the panchayat at the village level. The gram sabha is vested with the power to safeguard and preserve the

traditions and customs of the people, their cultural identities and community resources, and to uphold the customary mode of dispute resolution. It is also vested with the power to approve plans, programmes, and projects for social and economic development before these are taken up for implementation by the panchayat at the village level. The gram sabha is to identify or select persons as beneficiaries under poverty-alleviation and other programmes. Even the panchayat at the village level will be required to obtain from the gram sabha a certification of utilization of funds by that panchayat. Further, the gram sabha or the panchayat at the appropriate level would be consulted before acquiring land in the scheduled areas for development projects and before settling or rehabilitating persons affected by such projects. Again, the recommendations of the gram sabha or the panchayat at the appropriate level would be mandatory prior to the grant of prospecting licenses or mining leases for minerals or the grant of concessions for the exploitation of minor minerals by auction. The state government is expected to endow the gram sabha with the power to take up various activities. These include enforcement of prohibition, regulation or restriction of the sale and consumption of intoxicants, regulation of ownership of minor forest produce, prevention of land alienation and restoration of any unlawfully alienated land, management of village markets, control of money-lending, and supervision of plans and resources as well as institutions and functionaries. In short, for the gram sabha to function as an institution of self-government, the state government is required to ensure that the panchayat at the higher level does not assume the power and authority of any panchayat at the lower level, namely the gram sabha (Government of India 1996).

## The Problem of Democracy and Freedom

The creation of the institutional structures referred to above represented an incremental advance over other forms of tribal empowerment as it enlarged the scope of tribal power in two ways. First, the tribes were given some legislative, executive, and judicial powers that they did not have in other forms of the empowerment process. It is a different story that the issues over which they held such powers were very limited. The institution of the district council may be taken as an apt case to illustrate this point. Second,

the tribes were given more powers over a wider range of issues than earlier. The creation of state structures for the tribes is illustrative of this. Empowerment here implies the enlargement of power not only in the sense of power over a wider range of issues than had been granted earlier, but also in the sense of the nature of the power conferred and enjoyed. The tribes, for example, enjoyed more power in the state structures than they did in the other two institutions, namely the district council and the regional council. In addition, with the creation of such structures, tribes came to enjoy more effective control of power. That is, there was a relatively more effective distribution of power in favour of tribes.

However, even when there has been empowerment of tribes as opposed to non-tribes, as in the case of the district or regional councils earlier and the creation of new states in recent years, the benefits of empowerment have not percolated to the people at large. To begin with, there has been a general tendency at the state level to monopolize power rather than share it with people at large. The law-making power of the district councils in Meghalaya, for example, invariably experienced problems with the principle of repugnance. Any law or regulation promulgated by the district councils if repugnant to any law made by the state legislature was to be null and void, and the law enacted by the state legislature was to prevail. This made a mockery of the power and autonomy granted to the district councils. Thus, while the creation of certain state institutions gave more power to the tribes, it also led to processes that arrested the exercise of the power and autonomy at the grassroots level. In other words, the grassroots democratic political process was reduced to a political toy in the hands of the power elites, bureaucrats, and politicians at the state level (Roy Burman 1997). It is rather paradoxical that the state government manned by the tribes should come in the way of the smooth functioning of the district council. There is, then, a tendency within tribal society towards a greater monopolization of power by the elite sections of that society.

The empowering of tribes is primarily against non-tribes. At the same time, it is worth bearing in mind that there is hardly any territory, region, or district that is inhabited exclusively by a single tribal group. Where more than one tribal group exists, there invariably exists a certain degree of inequality and domination along tribal lines. Certain tribes are not only

likely to be numerically dominant but are also likely to be economically and politically more powerful than others. In such a situation, the empowerment of tribes may not necessarily mean the same thing to all the tribes living in a given territory. Some may stand in a more advantageous position vis-à-vis other tribal groups, especially the smaller ones, and are likely to exercise domination and power over others. Hence, empowerment may not necessarily lead to the empowerment of all tribal groups in a given region or territory. The empowerment of tribes may even fall short of the ideals of equality and social justice as embodied in the concept of citizenship. There is no doubt that tribal societies have relatively more egalitarian in comparison to non-tribal societies, but they are not altogether free of inequality. Besides the inequality inherent in the traditional social structure, especially inequality based on gender and lineage, such inequality in tribal society is increasing because of uneven access to the benefits of modernization. Hence, even with empowerment, marginalized sections such as women and commoners may remain without any power unless the notion of citizenship is also instilled in tribal society.

#### References

- Béteille, Andrè. 1999. 'Empowerment: The Indian Way.' *Economic and Political Weekly* 34 (22): 5892–97.
- Bijoy, C. R. 1999. 'Adivasis Betrayed: Adivasi Land Rights in Kerala.' *Economic and Political Weekly* 34 (22): 1329–35.
- Elwin, Verrier. 1944. *The Aboriginals*. Oxford pamphlets on Indian Affairs, no. 14. Bombay: Oxford University Press.
- ———. 1960. *A Philosophy for NEFA*. Shillong.
- Fernandes, Walter. 1996. 'The New Forest Act: Conservation Orientation But Where Are the People?' (mimeograph).
- Government of India, Ministry of Law and Justice. 1996. The Provision of the Panchayats (Extension to the Scheduled Areas) Act.
- Jaintia Hills Autonomous District Council (JHADC), Meghalaya 1997. Seminar paper on Autonomy and Self-governance (mimeograph). Developing Countries Research Centre (DCRC), Delhi University.
- Rao, B. Janardhan. 1996. Tribal Land Rights, Government Action, and Socio-political Movements (mimeograph). Rajiv Gandhi Institute for Contemporary Studies, New Delhi.
- Ray, Niharranjan. 1972. 'Introductory Address', in *Tribal Situation in India: Proceedings of a Seminar*, edited by K. S. Singh, Shimla: Indian Institute of Advanced Study, pp. 3–24.
- Roy Burman, B. K. 1994. *Tribes in Perspective*. Delhi: Mittal Publications.